Bayesian Multi-Faceted TRI Models for Measuring Professor's Performance in the Classroom. Un modelo TRI de múltiples facetas bayesiano para la evaluación del desempeño docente en el aula
Universidad Nacional de Colombia, Bogotá, Colombia
Abstract
Evaluations of professor performance are based on the assumption that students learn more from highly qualied professors and the fact that students observe professor performance in the classroom. However, many studies question the methodologies used for such measurements, in general, because the averages of categorical responses make little statistical sense. In this paper, we propose Bayesian multi-faceted item response theory models to measure teaching performance. The basic model takes into account efects associated with the severity of the students responding to the survey, and the courses that are evaluated. The basic model proposed in this work is applied to a data set obtained from a survey of perception of professor performance conducted by Science Faculty of the Universidad Nacional de Colombia to its students. Professor scores that are obtained as model outputs are real numerical values that can be used to calculate common statistics in professor evaluation. In this case, the statistics are mathematically consistent. Some of them are shown to illustrate the usefulness of the model.
Key words : Bayesian inference; Multi-faceted IRT model; Professor performance.
Resumen
Las evaluaciones del desempeño del profesor se basan en el supuesto de que los estudiantes aprenden más de profesores altamente calicados y el hecho de que los estudiantes observan el desempeño del profesor en el aula. Sin embargo, muchos estudios cuestionan las metodologías utilizadas para tales mediciones, en general, porque los promedios de las respuestas categóricas tienen poco sentido estadístico. En este artículo, proponemos modelos Bayesianos de Teoría de Respuesta al Ítem de múltiples facetas para medir el desempeño. El modelo propuesto tiene en cuenta los efectos asociados con la severidad de los estudiantes que responden a la encuesta y los cursos que se evalúan. El modelo se aplica a un conjunto de datos obtenido de una encuesta de percepción del desempeño del profesor realizada por la Facultad de Ciencias de la Universidad Nacional de Colombia a sus estudiantes. Los puntajes del profesor que se obtienen como resultados del modelo son valores numéricos reales que se pueden usar para calcular estadísticas comunes en la evaluación del profesor. En este caso, las estadísticas son matemáticamente consistentes. Se muestra que algunos de ellos ilustran la utilidad del modelo.
Palabras clave : Desempeño del profesor; Inferencia bayesiana; Modelo TRI de múltiples facetas.

1. Introduction


   Studies evaluating professor performance have become an important aspect for
administrative decision making in higher education institutions. Becker & Watts
(1999) were the rst to report that student evaluations in professor education were
the most used method, and the only one in some cases. One of the most important
professor evaluation tools is the Student Evaluation of Teaching (SET). SET has
some of the following objectives: to provide a diagnosis for the faculties about
the performance of their professors; obtain measures of professors' eectiveness
in order to make decisions about the institution sta and give information to
students for the selection of courses and professors (Marsh, 2007). SET surveys
usually include open and closed questions about professor performance in the
course.An important characteristic of SET is the use of Likert-scales throughout
the questionnaire.
    In the course of university studies, students are exposed to dierent teaching
styles that provide dierent professors. Therefore, a hypothesis about the SET
could be that students give better grades to the professors from whom they learned
more. The validity of these evaluations is based on the fact that students observe
the performance of professors in the classroom and will therefore respond sincerely
when they are asked about it. There is strong evidence that the students' answers
to the teaching performance questions do not measure such construct.
    The rst formal grading scale for a professor evaluation was published in 1915
(Spencer & Flyr, 1992). In the 1920s several of the main universities of the
United States introduced the evaluation procedures for professors by the students
(Marsh, 1987). During the 1970s and 1980s Feldman (1978; 1979; 1983; 1987;
1989) published a series of works, related to the factors that inuence the results
of professor performance evaluations. On the other hand, in the 1980s, two meta-
analyzes were performed; Cohen (1981) and Feldman (1989) sought to collect
information related to the correlations between SET results and student learning.


                Revista Colombiana de Estadística - Theoretical Statistics 44 (2021) 385412

Multi-Faceted Models for Evaluation Professor Performance                              387

    Uttl et al. (2017) published an updated meta-analysis of these correlations. The
document identies that the meta-analyzes of the 1980s have numerous problems
related to the location of the studies used and that none of them is replicable.
Philip & Richard (2014) reviewed the SET scores from a statistical perspective.
In the article they mention important points related to the validity of using the
SET scores. Additionally Braga et al. (2014) evaluate the content of student
evaluations in contrast to measures of professor eectiveness. The authors use
student performance to estimate measures of eectiveness.
    In this paper we discuss the validity of professor evaluation instruments through
the implementation of statistical models which take into account some factors such
the severity/leniency of students, the diculty eect that dierentiate the courses
and so on. The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 is a review about the
factors that aect the evaluation of professor performance. An introduction to
the multi-faceted item response theory models is given in Section 3. The Bayesian
proposed model to measure performance professors is introduced in Section 4.
Some tools for evaluation of model adequacy are introduced in Section 5.
   This paper is based on a master's thesis in research, to expand the information
presented the reader can refer to Cordoba (2020).


2. Evaluation of Professors

    In general, there are two positions related to the use of SET. Those in favor set
out dierent reasons for its use: Wachtel (1998) refers rst to the economic issue,
since he argue that these types of evaluations are cheap and easy to implement,
secondly, he claims that SETs give value to student opinions. Murray (2005)
emphasizes that students are the only ones who can assess their perceptions of
professors in the classroom.
    Those who oppose its use argue that SETs are assessments that measure
student satisfaction and, therefore, student satisfaction is inuenced by external
factors that are not related to the eectiveness of teaching professor. For example,
they argue that if a student scored dierently than expected, their SET score is
likely to be low, relative to their low satisfaction (Uttl et al., 2012).
   Studies in education are extensive. It has been argued that variables can
produce specic changes in the grades given to professors by students. Topics
such as teaching methods, gender bias, academic rank and experience, diculty of
the course, personality characteristics, professor's reputation, sense of humor and
degree of indulgence (Bélanger & Longden, 2009) are included. In general, these
variables are associated with three groups: course, student and professor variables.
   It is common that the characteristics of the course have an inuence when it
comes to providing the grades by the students. Some of those characteristics that
may inuence the scores are: electivity of course (Feldman, 1978), class schedule
(Centra, 1993; Feldman, 1978; Koushki & Kunh, 1982), course level (Feldman,
1978; Marsh, 1987), class size (Feldman, 1978) and thematic area (Feldman, 1978;
Centra & Creech, 1976).


               Revista Colombiana de Estadística - Theoretical Statistics 44 (2021) 385412

388                             Karen Rosana Cordoba & Alvaro Mauricio Montenegro

   In other hand, it is commonly accepted that in performance evaluation the most
important variables associated directly with professor are: professor rank and work
experience (Centra & Creech, 1976; Feldman, 1983), professor performance based
on their reputation (Perry et al., 1974), productivity in research (Feldman, 1987)
and gender (Basow & Silberg, 1987; Martin, 1984).
    Finally, the main hypothesis about SET is that students give better grades to
the professors from whom they learned more. The validity of these evaluations
is based on the assumption that students observe the performance of professors
in the classroom and will therefore respond sincerely when they are asked about
it. However, there are factors that really aect this hypothesis: personality of
the student (Abrami et al., 1982), interest in the area of knowledge of the course
(Feldman, 1977), student's gender (Feldman, 1977), emotional state at the end
of the course (Small et al., 1982) and expectation and leniency hypothesis Marsh
(1987).
    If the reader is interesting in more information about these topics, is
recommended that reviews the content of the dierent papers referenced in this
section.


3. Multi-Faceted Rasch models

    Multi-faceted Rasch models (MFRM) refer to a class of item response models
suitable for a simultaneous analysis of multiple variables potentially having
an impact on assessment outcomes (Eckes, 2011). MFRM incorporates more
variables, or facets, than the two that are included in a classical item response
model. The rst comprehensive theoretical statement was done by Linacre (1989).
Based on this seminal work, substantive applications of MFRM have appeared
in the elds of language testing, educational and psychological measurement
(Barkaoui, 2013), social behavior and the health sciences (Engelhard, 2002, 2013),
and many others.
    However, some disadvantages have also been reported from the applications
of MFRM, the most important being related to scoring. The diculty associated
with objectively scoring the answers to the items contributes to a decrease in the
reliability of the scores. In practice, raters are required to score examinees using a
specic rubric. Nevertheless, raters may inuence examinees' scores in a number
of ways.
    Raters introduce variability into the scores gives to examinees that is associated
with characteristics of the raters and not with the performance of examinees. In
terms of regression models, rater variability is an unwanted variance component
because it obscures the construct being measured. To solve this problem, a
variance component is included in the MFRM, which authors identify as the
severity/leniency component. The main objective in the MFRM is to include
in the linear predictor those facets that have an impact on the scores awarded to
examinees.




                Revista Colombiana de Estadística - Theoretical Statistics 44 (2021) 385412

Multi-Faceted Models for Evaluation Professor Performance                              389

   Consider as an example an educational test about writing in the English
language. Assuming that the relevant facets have been identied, such as the
examinees, tasks, and raters, an MFRM may be expressed as follows (Eckes, 2011):
                                           
                                   pnljk
                        log                     = θn − δl − αj − τk ,
                                  pnljk−1
where

  pnljk = probability of examinee n receiving a rating k from rater j on task l,
pnljk−1 = probability of examinee n receiving a rating k − 1 from rater j on task l,
     θn = ability of examinee n,
     δl = diculty of task l,
    αj = severity of rater j,
     τk = diculty of receiving a rating of k relative to k − 1.




4. Bayesian           Multi-faceted                    Model        for   Measuring

    Professor Performance

    In this section the proposed Bayesian multi-faceted (BMF) model is introduced
as a tool to be applied to SET data. However, applications of the model in other
areas are not only possible but are welcomed. In particular, the BMF could be
used in any application of the MFRM.
   In addition, the ordered logistic distribution is introduced. The denitions of
the BMF models introduced are based on this distribution.


4.1. Ordered Logistic Distribution
    The inverse logit function is dened as logit−1 (x) = (1 + e−x )−1 . This
expression denes the cumulative distribution function (cdf) of the logistic
distribution. Let β 0 = (β1 , . . . , βK−1 ) ∈ RK−1 , such that βk < βk+1 , and let
η ∈ R. Let K ∈ N with K > 2. Then for k ∈ {1, . . . , K}, the probabilistic mass
function (pmf) of the ordered logistic distribution is dened as follows.
                   
                               −1
                   1 − logit (η − β1 )
                                                         if k = 1,
                          −1
        g(k|η, β) = logit (η − βk−1 ) − logit−1 (η − βk ) if 1 < k < K,
                     logit−1 (η − βK−1 )                  if k = K.
                   
                   

The k = 1 and k = K edge cases can be subsumed into the general denition by
setting β0 = −∞ and βK = ∞ with logit−1 (−∞) = 0 and logit−1 (∞) = 1.
    In a classical logistic regression, the η -values are known predictors, while the
βk -values are regression parameters to be estimated. In this case, the η 's are


               Revista Colombiana de Estadística - Theoretical Statistics 44 (2021) 385412

390                                    Karen Rosana Cordoba & Alvaro Mauricio Montenegro

latent variables to be predicted, and the βk -values are item parameters. Note that
η and the βk 's are in the same space. On the other side, for a xed value of
η , if βk−1 < η ≤ βk , then, the category k generally has the highest probability.
Figure 1 illustrates this fact. Consequently, the β -parameters are cut points that
determine the probability of each category depending on the value of η .




Figure 1: Probabilistic mass function of the Ordered Logistic distribution for dierent
              values of η , with β = (−3.0, 0.0, 2.3)t , K = 4.




4.2. Bayesian Multi-faceted Model for Measuring Professor
     Performance
   It is assumed that professor performance is measured by using a latent variable.
From a general statistical perspective, latent variables can be considered random
eects (Bartholomew et al., 2011). Moreover, the severity/leniency of the student
when evaluating a professor is measured by a new latent variable. In each
course, each student grades a professor in all items of the professor's performance
questionnaire. It is assumed that each item is based on a Likert scale with Kj
categories; the questionnaire has p items, and N professors are evaluated. The
student selects a category of the item to grade the professor.
     The Bayesian Multi-Faceted model is then dened as follows. Let θi be
the latent variable which measures the performance of the i−th professor. Let
γ 0i = (γi1 , . . . , γi,ni ) be the vector of latent variables which measures the severity
of the students evaluating the professor i. The value ni is the total number of
students evaluating the professor i. Let κc a random eect associated to the
course c. Let β 0j = (βj1 , . . . , βjKj −1 ) be cut points to the item j associated with
each response category. Let Yijsc be the rating that the s-th student assigns to
professor i for the item j in the course c. Thus, the conditional probability that
[Yijsc = k|θi , γis , β j , κc ] is given by


 P rob[Yijsc = k|θi , γis , β j , κc ] = logit−1 (ηisc − βj(k−1) ) − logit−1 (ηisc − βjk ), (1)

     where k = 1, . . . , Kj , c = 1, . . . , C , j = 1, . . . , p, s = 1, . . . , ni , i = 1, . . . , N ,
and, ηisc = θi −κc −γis . The model dened in the equation (1) is not identiable as
it is common in item response models. To set a scale, we assume that θi ∼ N (0, 1).
In addition, the following prior distributions are assigned.


                   Revista Colombiana de Estadística - Theoretical Statistics 44 (2021) 385412

Multi-Faceted Models for Evaluation Professor Performance                                   391

                                 κc ∼ N (0, σκ2 ),
                                γis ∼ N (0, σγ2 ),
                               βjk ∼ N (µβ , σβ2 ), cut points
                                µβ ∼ N (0, 2),
                                σκ ∼ Cauchy(0, 2)I(0,∞) ,
                                σγ ∼ Cauchy(0, 2)I(0,∞) ,
                                σβ ∼ Cauchy(0, 2)I(0,∞) .

    The use of Cauchy distribution for the parameters σ is due to that this family of
prior distributions are more restrict for very large values and have better behavior
near 0 (Gelman et al., 2006).
    To have the posterior distribution of the model, two assumptions are required.
First, the responses of the students are independent. Second, the responses of the
student to a professor are independent. These assumptions, especially the second,
may be controversial. The rst assumption may be violated if a student responds to
more than one questionnaire for the same professor. This can occur if the student
is taking two courses with the same professor. However, in this case this problem
is diminished because the subjects are dierent. Furthermore, there is no way to
know when this situation occurs because the students' responses are anonymous.
On the other hand, each question in the questionnaire is designed to measure a
dierent aspect of the professor's performance in the classroom. Therefore, it is
expected that each one of the questions is answered independently by the student.
   Let pijksc = P rob[Yijsc = k|θi , γis , β j , κc ]. Thus, the posterior distribution for
the Bayesian multi-faceted model is given by
                       p Y
                     N Y ni Y Kj
                            C Y
                     Y
    L[θ, β, γ|y] ∝                       [pijksc ]χk (yijsc )×
                     i=1 j=1 s=1 c=1 k=1

                     p(θi )p(βjk |µβ , σβ )p(γis |σγ )p(µβ )p(κc |σκ )p(σβ )p(σγ )p(σκ ),   (2)

   Bold Greek letters represent the corresponding complete vector of parameters.
Vector y is the complete vector of the observed responses, and χk (yijsc ) is dened
as                                     (
                                          1, if yijsc = k.
                         χk (yijsc ) =                                            (3)
                                          0, otherwise.


5. Tools for Evaluating Model Adequacy of BMF

    Models

   To be sure that the BMF models are good to measure the professor's
performance, it is necessary to guarantee:

   1. Unidimensionality: The items in the questionnaire are designed to
      measure a unique construct.


                 Revista Colombiana de Estadística - Theoretical Statistics 44 (2021) 385412

392                            Karen Rosana Cordoba & Alvaro Mauricio Montenegro

  2. Independence: The latent traits θi must be independent of the items and
     from the socio-demographic characteristics of the students, the students'
     severity, and their scores in the course.

  3. Goodness of t (GoF): It is necessary to assess the quality of the model
     to t the data.

    The BMF models proposed in this paper are unidimensional. That is, the items
in the questionnaire are designed to measure a unique construct. In Section 5.1,
we introduce some tools to assess the unidimensionality of the data.
    The second important issue is that the latent traits θi are independent from the
items in the questionnaire and from the socio-demographic characteristics of the
students, the students' severity, and their scores in the course. Furthermore, it is
assumed that the experts who design the questionnaires guarantee independence
between the questionnaire and professors. The theoretical aspects of previously
discussed concerns are based on item response theory (Bock, 1997; Baker & Kim,
2004; Birnbaum, 1968). Nevertheless, independence between the latent traits and
the socio-demographic characteristics of the students, their severity and their score
in the course must be assessed.
   In the item response models, it is necessary to assess the goodness of t of the
model to the complete data, the adequacy of the model for tting the data of each
one of the examinees, and the data of each one of the items. In Section 5.2, a
GoF statistics is proposed to do that, and statistics to compare models are also
presented.


5.1. Analysis of Unidimensionality
   The rst principle to dene a scale to measure a unique construct is that
the resulting data be unidimensional. There are several tools to evaluate the
unidimensionality of data. Three of them were used in this study:
   First, the principal component analysis (PCA) as a dimensionality reduction
technique. There are dierent interpretations about the dimensions of the data
based on the plot of the eigenvalues from PCA. In general, a rst eigenvalue that is
very large compared to the other values suggests unidimensionality (Jollie, 2003).
    Second, Cronbach's alpha reliability coecient is an index between 0 and 1
based on the variance of the total score and the variance of the score of each item.
The extreme value 0 means that the items are not correlated, and value 1, means
that all the items are the same. According to the experts, values greater than 0.75
or 0.80 mean that the data is measuring a unique construct (Cronbach, 1951; Lord
& Novick, 2008).
    Finally, the Cronbach Mesbah Curve (CMC) shows Cronbach's alpha coecient
after the item for which the preserved data has a maximal Cronbach's alpha
coecient is removed. If the data is unidimensional, the curve is monotonically
increasing. For further details see the work of Cameletti & Caviezel (2011).




               Revista Colombiana de Estadística - Theoretical Statistics 44 (2021) 385412

Multi-Faceted Models for Evaluation Professor Performance                                           393

5.2. Goodness of t Statistics
    For ease, in this section, it is assumed that the complete vector parameter is
θ , and the observed data is y . The likelihood of the observations is f (y|θ) and
the prior density of θ is π(θ); hence the model specication is f (y|θ)π(θ). The
predictive distribution of unobserved values ω is denoted f (ω|y), and dened as
                                              Z
                                 f (ω|y) =        f (ω|θ)π(θ|y)dθ.

    In the GoF procedures, the data ω are named replicate data. Let W be the
random variable with density f (ω|y). For evaluating the adequacy of a model to
the observed data, Box (1980) proposed to use the predictive distribution f (ω|y).
In particular, Box proposed to compute the expectation E[g(W , θ)|y] of some
relevant checking statistic g(W , θ). Gelfand et al. (1992) proposed several checking
functions based on discrepancy measures. In this work, a checking function based
on the discrepancy statistic D(W , θ) = −2 log f (W |θ) is proposed. The constant
2 is redundant, nevertheless, it was included in order to have a counterpart to the
log likelihood statistics commonly used in frequentist statistics. The idea of using
discrepancy measures is studied in deep by Gelman et al. (1996).
   According to the notation used by Box (1980) and Gelfand et al. (1992) and
using the discrepancy statistic D as proposed by Gelman et al. (1996), we construct
the goodness of t statistics as follows. Dene Bω,θ = {(ω, θ) : D(ω, θ) ≤
D(y, θ)}. The check statistics is dened as g(W , θ) = IBω,θ (W , θ). The statistical
decision is based on the value dω,θ dened as
                           dω,θ = P (Bω,θ )
                                 = E[g(W , θ)|y]
                                   Z Z
                                 =     g(ω, θ)f (ω|θ)π(θ|y)dθdω.

Values of dω,θ around 0.5 conrm that the model t well the data. A reasonable
range can be between 0.05 and 0.95, or more strictly, between 0.1 and 0.9.

5.2.1. Goodness of Fit for Bayesian Multi-Faceted Models
    In item response models, it is common to assess the model t to the complete
data and to items and people separately. Let y i.. be the complete vector of
responses to professor i, y .j. be the complete vector of responses to item j . The
corresponding replicate data will be denoted ω i.. , and ω .j. respectively. To assess
the GoF of the model to the i-th professor's data, the predictive density is used,
given by
                           Z
        f (ω i.. |y i.. ) = f (ω i.. |θi , γ i , κi , β)π(θi , γ i , κi , β|y i.. )dθi dγ i dκi , dβ. (4)

Similarly, the predictive density to assess the t to the j -th item is given by
                            Z
         f (ω .j. |y .j. ) = f (ω .j. |θ, γ, κ, β j )π(θ, γ, κ, β j |y .j. )dθdγdκdβ j .             (5)


                   Revista Colombiana de Estadística - Theoretical Statistics 44 (2021) 385412

394                                Karen Rosana Cordoba & Alvaro Mauricio Montenegro

Finally, the predictive density to assess the t to the complete data test is given
by                       Z
               f (ω|y) =        f (ω|θ, γ, κ, β)π(θ, γ, κ, β|y)dθdγdκdβ.                           (6)


5.2.2. Computational Approach to Compute The GoF Statistics
    Let (θ (t) , β (t) , γ (t) ), κ(t) ) be the complete t-th sample from the posterior
distribution π(θ, β, γ, κ|y), with t = 1, . . . , T . The data come from the estimation
output produced by Stan. The GoF statistic for the data of i-th professor can be
calculated as follows:

  1. Obtain a replicate data vector {ω ijsc ; j = 1, . . . , p; s = 1, . . . , ni } from the
     ordered logistic distributions given by
                       (t)         (t)    (t)      −1       (t)            (t)         (t)
                            c , γis , β j ) = logit
             gijsc (k|θi , κ(t)                       (θi − κ(t)
                                                             c − γis − βj,k−1 )
                                                            (t)    (t)             (t)
                                                − logit−1 (θi − γis − κ(t)
                                                                       c − βj,k ),

      k = 1, . . . , Kj . Remember that βj0 = −∞, and βjKj = ∞.
  2. The discrepancy measure for ω i.. is given by
                 (t)         (t)    (t)
        Di (ωi.. |θi , κ(t)
                        c , γi , βj ) =
                                p X
                                  ni X Kj
                                     C X
                                                                          (t)    (t)         (t)
                                X
                         −2                       χk (ωijsc ) log gijsc (k|θi , γis , κ(t)
                                                                                       c , βj )
                                j=1 s=1 c=1 k=1


  3. The discrepancy measure for y i.. is given by

                 (t)         (t)   (t)
        Di (yi.. |θi , κ(t)
                        c , γi , βj ) =
                                p X
                                  ni X Kj
                                     C X
                                                                          (t)    (t)         (t)
                                X
                           −2                     χk (yijsc ) log gijsc (k|θi , γis , κ(t)
                                                                                       c , βj )
                                j=1 s=1 c=1 k=1


  4. The GoF statistic is given by
                       T
                    1X
             pi =        1            (t)  (t) (t) (t)           (t)  (t) (t) (t)   .
                    T t=1 (Di (ωi.. |θi ,γ i ,κc ,β )−Di (yi.. |θi ,γ i ,κc ,β )>0)

   Values of pi close to 0.5 mean a good t. The GoF statistic for the data of j -th
item can be compute similarly.


5.3. Model Selection Criteria
   There are a variety of procedures for the selection of models within the
framework of Bayesian inference. In this work we used WAIC and LOO.


                Revista Colombiana de Estadística - Theoretical Statistics 44 (2021) 385412

Multi-Faceted Models for Evaluation Professor Performance                               395

5.3.1. Watanabe Information Criterium
    The Watanabe information Criterium (WAIC) was introduced by Watanabe
(2010). For discussion and details see Gelman et al. (2014) and Ariyo et al. (2020).
For a future observation ỹi , this criterion measures the predictive accuracy of the
model based on the log-posterior predictive distribution log pθ|y (ỹi ) of the vector of
parameters θ . Since ỹi is unknown, predictive accuracy is dened by the expected
log-predictive distribution (elpd) as
                   elpdi = Ef [log pθ|y (ỹi )] = log pθ|y (ỹi )f (ỹi )dỹi ,
where f is the distribution unknown to the true model. For each observation of a
new data set, elpd is calculated to establish the predictive accuracy of that data
set. The punctual logarithmic predictive distribution (lppd) based on the observed
data and is calculated as follows:
                           Yn                n
                                             X    Z
                lppd = log     pθ|yi (yi ) =   log p(yi |θ)p(θ|y)dθ
                              i=1                 i=1       θ

    In practice we use a sample from the posterior distribution of the parameter
to estimate lppd as                     "              #
                                 n          K
                                X         1 X
                         lppd
                          d =       log              k
                                              p(yi |θ )                      (7)
                                i=1
                                          K
                                                    k=1

   An estimation of the eective number of parameters pW AIC is given by
                      n
                         "         K
                                              !      K
                                                                     #
                     X          1 X              1 X
          pW AIC = 2      log               k
                                     p(yi |θ ) −                  k
                                                       log p(yi |θ )                    (8)
                     i=1
                                K                K
                                          k=1                      k=1

   Then WAIC is given by
                              W AIC = −2lppd
                                         d + 2pW AIC                                    (9)

5.3.2. Cross-validation Leave-one-out
    Cross-validation is an approach to estimate predictive accuracy outside the
sample using adjustments within the sample. It requires re-adjusting the model
with dierent training sets. Cross-validation Leave-one-out (LOO) can be easily
calculated using importance sampling (Gelfand et al., 1992). Vehtari et al. (2017)
showed the development of statistics. They consider the calculations using the log-
likelihood evaluated in the usual subsequent simulations of the parameters dened
in the equation (7). The Bayesian LOO estimate of the out-of-sample predictive
adjustment is
                                       n
                                       X
                             elpdloo =   log p(yi |y−i ),                     (10)
                                            i=1
where                                       Z
                            p(yi |y−i ) =       p(yi |θ)p(θ|y−i )dθ                    (11)
is the predictive density given the information without the i-th data point.


                Revista Colombiana de Estadística - Theoretical Statistics 44 (2021) 385412

396                            Karen Rosana Cordoba & Alvaro Mauricio Montenegro

6. Evaluation Of Teaching Performance at Univer-

      sidad Nacional de Colombia

    The data comes from a student survey that is conducted every semester at
the Faculty of Science in Universidad Nacional de Colombia. The survey is
designed to measure the perception of professor performance in the classroom,
the relevance of the course and the eciency of the resources available on campus.
The questionnaire can be reviewed in Appendix A. It contained 25 questions in 8
sections as following:

  1. General student data: Information about sociodemographic characteris-
     tics of students without requesting explicit personal identication.

  2. Course management: Inquire about topics related to program fulllment,
     regular professor attendance, and if group work is encouraged and the
     achievements of the students by the professor are recognized.

  3. Impact of the course: Information on the impact of the subject on
     vocational training; topics related directly to the contents are directed.

  4. Learning environments: Inquire about issues related to the use of other
     spaces for the development of the subject and the promotion of self-teaching
     by the professor.

  5. Use of technology: Inquire about the use of digital technologies and tools
     for the development of skills by students.

  6. Physical plant and implements: Information on the infrastructure
     conditions and the quality of the implements used for the development of
     the course.

  7. Auxiliary: Inquire about the need and importance of the support of the
     auxiliary in the course.

  8. General: Inquire about issues related to strengths and weaknesses of the
     general performance of the professor and the content of the subject.

Two Likert scales were used to code the responses. The rst is coded as Poor, Bad,
Regular, Good and Excellent. This scale is aimed at measuring the perception of
the overall performance of the student himself, and some aspects of the students
perception about the professor performance and the content of the subject. The
second scale is code as Never, Almost Never, Sometimes, Almost Always and
Always and is used in specic questions about the course management.

6.1. Preliminary Analysis
   Data from the second semester of 2015 were used. The initial data contains
responses associated with 14703 records. The information is related to professor,


               Revista Colombiana de Estadística - Theoretical Statistics 44 (2021) 385412

Multi-Faceted Models for Evaluation Professor Performance                                                                                                                              397

course and student. In addition to this, data related to the department that oers
the subject and the sex of professors and students were available. Given that in
this study we focused on the aspect of teaching performance, the Sections 6, 7 and
8 of the survey were not taken into account.
    An initial inspection of the data was carried out and it was observed that
the lowest categories in the two scales had few answers, so those categories were
collapsed and the items were recoded into four ordinal response categories.
    According to the proposed model, as the eect of the course is one facet, we
debugged the data to obtain professors who were evaluated in at least two courses.
We obtained 203 professors with such condition. A sample of 50 professors was
selected to run the example. In that sample, a total of 2505 student responses
were reported, corresponding to 94 courses.


6.2. Unidimensionality Analysis
   According to presented in Section 5.1, the unidimensionality was veried with
three tools: principal component analysis (Jollie, 2003) and reliability analysis
through Cronbach's alpha coecient (Cronbach, 1951) by using the Cronbach-
Mesbah curve (Cameletti & Caviezel, 2011).
   The left panel in Figure 2 shows the bar chart of the percentage of variance
explained by the eigenvalues, and the right panel presents the Cronbach-Mesbah
curve.

                                                                                                       0.9
                                    40
                                         ●

                                                                                                                                  C_25
                                                                                                                                    ●
                                                                                                                                       C_16
                                                                                                                                         ●
                                                                                                                                            C_28
                                                                                                                                              ●
                                                                                                                                                                    C_13
                                                                                                                                                                      ●  C_26
                                                                                                                                                                          ●     C_22
                                                                                                                                                                                  ●

                                                                                                                           C_15
                                                                                                                             ●
                                                                                                                                                        C_23
                                                                                                                                                         ●     C_12
                                                                                                                                                                 ●
                                                                                                                                                   C_27
                                                                                                                                                     ●

                                                                                                                    C_14
                                                                                                                      ●
Percentage of explained variances




                                    30                                                                 0.8   C_17
                                                                                                               ●
                                                                                       Maximum alpha




                                    20                                                                 0.7



                                             ●



                                    10
                                                                                                       0.6
                                                 ●
                                                     ●
                                                          ●     ●
                                                                      ●   ●   ●
                                                                                  ●



                                    0
                                                                                                       0.5
                                         1   2   3   4    5     6     7   8   9   10
                                                         Dimensions


             Figure 2: Verication of unidimensionality at the Universidad Nacional survey data.


   The gure in the left panel suggests that the data were approximately
unidimensional since the percentage of variance explained by the rst own value is
substantially greater than the percentage explained by the second value. On the
other hand, in the right panel, the Cronbach-Mesbah curve shows the Cronbach
coecient after each item that maximizes the reliability of the data is removed.
   In accordance with Cameletti & Caviezel (2011), if the data is unidimensional,
then the curve is monotonously increasing. However, although the curve does
not have strictly that behavior, it is observed that the change in reliability when


                                                     Revista Colombiana de Estadística - Theoretical Statistics 44 (2021) 385412

398                                                      Karen Rosana Cordoba & Alvaro Mauricio Montenegro

extracting two items is negligible in terms of the scale. It can be veried that
the estimated values of Cronbach's Alpha in the curve are between 0.79 and 0.87.
Given the above, it is concluded carefully that the instrument complies with the
one-dimensional assumption. In addition, the estimated value of Cronbach's Alpha
for the sample is 0.86, therefore it is presumed that the instrument is measuring
a single construct.


6.3. Parameter Estimation
   The proposed model to t the data was run in Stan (Stan Development Team,
2020c,b), through its R interface named Rstan (Stan Development Team, 2020a).
Stan is a probabilistic programming language currently used to run very complex
Bayesian codes at high performance and is a free software which implements
Hamiltonian MCMC samplers (Neal, 2011) and the No-U-turn sampler (Homan
& Gelman, 2014). For details on the code refer to the Appendix B. This section
species the most relevant results related to the specication of the parameters.


6.3.1. Severity parameters
    The inclusion of a severity parameter in the model allows capturing the
variability associated with the answers given by the students, determining for
each of them the degree of severity or indulgence they perceive the performance
of each professor. Negative values of the parameter imply that the evaluator has a
tendency to give higher grades than the average, while positive values imply that
the evaluator has tendency to give low grades.
    Figure 3 presents the distribution of the severity parameter γ for the 2505
students and the credibility bands ordered for some of them. The distribution
of the severity parameters is approximately symmetrical, the model suggests that
there are forgiving students in the sample with a high degree of severity in the
same proportion.

                Parameter Distribution γ                                            95% credibility bands
          0.4

                                                                              5.0                                                                                                                               ●




          0.3

                                                                              2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                            ●
                                                                  Severity
Density




                                                                                                                                                                                                        ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●●
                                                                                                                                                                                              ●●
          0.2                                                                                                                                                                            ●●
                                                                                                                                                                                    ●●
                                                                                                                                                                          ●   ●●●
                                                                                                                                                                  ●   ●●●
                                                                                                                                                            ●●●
                                                                              0.0                                                                     ●●●
                                                                                                                                                ●●●
                                                                                                                                          ●●●
                                                                                                                                    ●●●
                                                                                                                              ●●●
                                                                                                                         ●●
                                                                                                                    ●●
                                                                                                               ●●
                                                                                                          ●●
          0.1                                                                                         ●
                                                                                                  ●
                                                                                              ●
                                                                                          ●

                                                                             −2.5     ●




          0.0

                           −2                   0        2                            0                             500               1000                  1500                2000                    2500
                                           Parameter γ                                                                                          Student


                                   Figure 3: Results of the severity parameter estimate γ .

   Additionally, Figure 4 presents box plots showing the distributions of the
severity parameters estimated according to the gender of the students and to


                                     Revista Colombiana de Estadística - Theoretical Statistics 44 (2021) 385412

Multi-Faceted Models for Evaluation Professor Performance                                                                                     399

the type of program they have with the university, that is, if they are part of an
undergraduate or postgraduate program.

                Severity by gender                                               Severity by type of bonding
                                                    ●                                                                               ●



            4                                       ●
                                                                             4                                                      ●

                               ●                    ●                                                                               ●
                                                                                                                                    ●
                                                    ●                                                                               ●
                               ●
                               ●                    ●
                                                    ●                                                                               ●
                                                                                                                                    ●
                               ●                                                                  ●


            2                                                                2
Severity




                                                                 Severity
            0                                                                0




           −2                                                               −2
                                                    ●
                                                    ●                                                                               ●
                                                                                                                                    ●
                               ●                                                                                                    ●
                                                    ●                                                                               ●


                             Female                Male                                      Postgraduate                     Undergraduate
                                         Gender                                                             type of bonding


           Figure 4: Results of severity parameter according to gender and type of program.

   From the above, visually it was observed that there are no substantial
dierences between the grades given by female students with those of male.
However, the average severity of women was -0.072 while that of men was
0.027, which suggests that men are slightly less forgiving when rating teaching
performance.
   The variability between female and male distributions was similar because the
p-value obtained from a test of homogeneity of variance was 0.334. To illustrate if
there are dierences between these averages, a mean dierence test was calculated
and a p-value of 0.023 was obtained, this indicates that there is a dierence between
the average severity of women and men, however, it is important to note that the
sample sizes for this test are large (853 women and 1652 men) and therefore any
dierence would be signicant.
   By type of bonding, dierences were observed between the two distributions,
however, for this case, the variability of the severity was similar because the p-
value obtained from the homogeneity of variance test was 0.358, which indicates
that the variances between the two groups were equal.
    The average severity of postgraduate students was -0.164 while that of
undergraduate students was 0. This suggests that postgraduate students were on
average more forgiving than undergraduate students. Likewise, when performing
a test of dierence in measures, a p-value of 0.105 was obtained, which indicates
that there were dierences between the average severity of undergraduate and
postgraduate students.


6.3.2. Course Parameters
   The course parameter improves the adjustment of the estimation of teaching
performance by controlling the eect of the characteristics of the course. This
parameter is interpreted as a general diculty of the course, therefore, estimated
negative values of the parameter indicate that the course has a low perception of


                                      Revista Colombiana de Estadística - Theoretical Statistics 44 (2021) 385412

400                                                         Karen Rosana Cordoba & Alvaro Mauricio Montenegro

diculty, while positive values indicate that the course has a high perception of
diculty.
    Figure 5 shows the distribution of the parameter for the 97 courses and
its credibility bands. The distribution of the course parameters η had an
approximately symmetrical distribution, the estimated values were in a range of
-1,087 to 0.997, with an estimated average value of -0.056 and a deviation value
of 0.473 . The distribution presented a low variability, which indicates that the
estimated diculty of the courses is concentrated around 0. Due to the symmetry
shown in the graph, the model suggests that in the sample there were courses with
a perception of low and high diculty approximately in the same proportion.

                 Parameter distribution η                                                 95% Credibility bands
                                                                                      2


          0.75

                                                                                      1                                                                                              ●●
                                                                                                                                                                                  ●●●●
                                                                                                                                                                                ●●
                                                                                                                                                                               ●




                                                                     Course effect
                                                                                                                                                                              ●●
                                                                                                                                                                         ●●●●●
                                                                                                                                                                    ●●●●●
          0.50
Density




                                                                                                                                                                  ●●
                                                                                                                                                               ●●●
                                                                                                                                                           ●●●●
                                                                                                                                                       ●●●●
                                                                                      0                                                          ●●●●●●
                                                                                                                                       ●●●●●●●●●●
                                                                                                                                      ●
                                                                                                                                ●●●●●●
                                                                                                                         ●●●●●●●
                                                                                                                   ●●●●●●
                                                                                                               ●●●●
                                                                                                        ●●●●●●●
                                                                                                       ●
                                                                                                    ●●●

          0.25                                                                                    ●●●
                                                                                                ●●
                                                                                               ●
                                                                                     −1     ●
                                                                                             ●●




          0.00                                                                       −2
                            −2                 0            2                              0                      25                       50                      75
                                       Course parameter η                                                                           Course


                                                   Figure 5: Course parameters η results



6.3.3. Estimation of Teaching Performance and Item Parameters
    The parameter θ related to teacher performance is one of the most important in
the structure of the model, this represents the perception of teacher performance
in the classroom. Negative values of the parameter indicate a low perception of
teacher performance according to the criteria of the students, while positive values
indicate a high perception of performance.
    The Figure 6 presents in the left panel the distribution of the parameter and
in the right panel presents the credibility bands of 95% ordered for each of the 50
professors in the sample.
   The posterior distribution had an average value of 0.235 and a standard
deviation of 0.796, evidently it was a positive asymmetric distribution. In general,
the perception of teacher performance in the sample is good, however, there was a
small set of teachers with a very low perception of performance compared to the
average.
   Figure 7 shows the distribution of skills by teacher gender. The variability
between female and male distributions were similar because the p-value obtained
from a test of homogeneity of variance was 0.346. The estimated average
performance in female teachers was perceived higher than in male teachers, with
values of 0.501 and 0.105, respectively.


                                     Revista Colombiana de Estadística - Theoretical Statistics 44 (2021) 385412

Multi-Faceted Models for Evaluation Professor Performance                                                                                                                                                                                                                   401

                Parameter Distribution θ                                                                   95% Credibility bands


                                                                                                       2
          0.4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ●

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ● ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ●
                                                                                                       1                                                                                                                                      ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ● ● ●




                                                                                        Performance
          0.3                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ● ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ● ● ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ● ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                            ● ●
Density



                                                                                                                                                                                                      ● ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                ● ●
                                                                                                                                                                                          ● ●
                                                                                                                                                                                    ● ●
                                                                                                                                                                              ● ●
                                                                                                       0                                                              ●
                                                                                                                                                                          ●
                                                                                                                                                            ● ● ● ●
          0.2                                                                                                                                     ● ● ● ●
                                                                                                                                              ●
                                                                                                                                          ●
                                                                                                                                    ● ●

                                                                                                                              ● ●
                                                                                                      −1                  ●

          0.1                                                                                                         ●
                                                                                                                ● ●



                                                                                                      −2
          0.0

                           −2                             0                2                                0                             10                          20                               30                         40                                50
                                           Parameter θ                                                                                                                          Professor


                                                              Figure 6: Results teacher performance θ.

                                                               Performance by gender




                                                           1
                                            Performance




                                                           0




                                                          −1




                                                                               Female                                                              Male
                                                                                                Gender

                                      Figure 7: Results teacher performance θ by gender.


    A mean dierence test between the average performance of teachers by gender
was made, a p-value of 0.094 was obtained. This value indicates that there was a
dierence between the estimated average values. The previous results suggest that
in the Faculty of Sciences there were signicant dierences between the perception
of the teachers' teaching performance in favor of the females.
   Figure 8 shows the behavior of the items in the test with respect to the
parameter β . Each line represents an item, and the red points are those estimated
cuto points βk . Each item has 3 values of βk , naturally because each one has 4
response options.
     It was observed that the distribution of the cuto points βk of the items were
concentrated in values between -5 and 2, that is, values skewed to the left. Taking
this into account, only two items had their highest value of βk near to 2. This is an
indicator that the test in general had a slightly skewed behavior to the left, that
is, that the items were perceived with a low diculty for measuring the perception
of teaching performance.
   Items 2 and 3 had the lowest diculty category, in these two, students tended
to give teachers very high marks. In contrast, items 7 and 8 present the highest
diculty category of the questionnaire since the students gave homogeneously


                                     Revista Colombiana de Estadística - Theoretical Statistics 44 (2021) 385412

402                                         Karen Rosana Cordoba & Alvaro Mauricio Montenegro

lower grades. The estimated values of the item parameters can be seen in the
Appendix C.

                        Item parameters
                   14              ●                                ●                                                               ●



                   13                                   ●                           ●                           ●



                   12                                                   ●                           ●                                   ●



                   11                                                       ●                   ●                   ●



                   10                       ●                                   ●                                       ●



                   9                            ●                                   ●                                           ●



                   8
            Item




                                                                                            ●                           ●                   ●



                   7                                                                                        ●                       ●       ●



                   6               ●                        ●                                           ●



                   5                                ●                                   ●                                   ●



                   4                   ●                        ●                                       ●



                   3           ●                    ●                                       ●



                   2           ●                    ●                                           ●



                   1               ●                    ●                                           ●




                                       −4                                   −2                                      0                           2
                                                                Parameter β

                                   Figure 8: Items parameters.



6.4. Model Fit
    Section 5.2 describes a statistic for evaluating the goodness of t of the model.
In this section, the adjustment for the estimated parameters of ability θ and the
items βk was reviewed, as well as the obtaining of the goodness of t statistics at
the global level of the model.
   The value of the global goodness-of-t statistic in the proposed model was 0.41.
The average of the goodness of t statistics for the items in the proposed model was
0.43 and the average of the goodness-of-t statistics values for the skills of those
evaluated was 0.55. According to the established criteria, these values indicate
good t of the models.


6.5. Selection Criteria Models
  In this section, a comparison with a model that has fewer parameters was
made. For practical purposes, the comparison model is called model zero.
   Technically, the zero model in its mathematical form does not include the
additional parameter η , that is, this multi-faceted model does not recognize the
variability associated with the course taught by the teacher. The conditional
probability model is dened as:

                    P r [Yijs = k|θi , γis , βj ] = logit−1 (θi − γis − βj(k−1) )
                                                                                                                                                    (12)
                                                                        − logit−1 (θi − γis − βjk )

                    Revista Colombiana de Estadística - Theoretical Statistics 44 (2021) 385412

Multi-Faceted Models for Evaluation Professor Performance                               403

where Yijs is the random variable that represents the score assigned by the student
s to the teacher i in the item j , θic is the latent trace or performance of the teacher
i, βj the diculty of the item j and γis the severity of the student s to the teacher
i.
   Given the previous expression, and making a revision of the expression (1)
where the conditional probability of the proposed model is dened, it can be
deduced that the proposed model is a generalization of the zero model because the
objective of the inclusion of the parameter η is to capture additional variability
that should not inuence the estimation of the skill parameter θ.
    For each of the models, the estimation of the statistics of the selection criteria
is performed. Table 1 presents the results obtained for the WAIC and LOO criteria
detailed in Section 5.3. These criteria are generally more robust in hierarchical
models or models with random eects.
                        Table 1: Criteria for model selection.
                         Model             WAIC      LOO
                          Zero model         64808,8    64827,7
                          Proposed model     64788,4    64806,6


    The estimated values for the two models are close, however, it is important to
mention that the gain obtained by including the additional parameter in terms of
isolating the variability associated with the course is important. Statistical values
are lower for both criteria for the proposed model. Given this, it is inferred that
according to the selection criteria the model to be selected is the proposed model
because it presents lower values.


7. Conclusions

    The problem of estimating teaching performance from evaluations of student
perception was addressed. The evidence found showed that, in general, the
institutions make an incorrect use of the results of the surveys of perception
of teaching performance, this, because they carry out averages of ordinal scales
assigning a numerical value without any theoretical support.
   The main objective of this document was to give a statistical approach to
the use of evaluations of perception of teacher performance from the use of TRI
models, in order to obtain estimates of latent traces for both the evaluated As for
the evaluator, this taking into account that the evaluation involves aspects that
can inuence which cannot be controlled.
   The evidence shows that the implementation of a statistical model is important
in two ways: 1) It allows making inferences about the estimated parameters
associated with the model, in addition to having an associated error measurement,
and 2) It captures variability associated with the characteristics of the evaluation
that are not they are taken into account when other procedures are carried out,
that is, the course parameter is important to isolate the eect of the course that the
students take and that they are indirectly measuring when evaluating the teacher.


                Revista Colombiana de Estadística - Theoretical Statistics 44 (2021) 385412

404                            Karen Rosana Cordoba & Alvaro Mauricio Montenegro

   The problem was addressed with data from a survey of students on the
perception of teaching performance at the Faculty of Sciences of the National
University of Colombia. The nal instrument after the review had 14 items
focused on topics that inquired about the perception of teacher performance in
the classroom.
     The application had two orientations, the rst focused on the t of the model
and the analysis of the results, and the second focused on the t of the model
and in comparing the proposed model with a model called zero model that does
not considered in its mathematical expression the parameter associated with the
course η . The measurement instrument complies with the assumption of one-
dimensionality, that is, all the items are measuring a construct, which for the case
is it can be called Perception of teacher performance.
    It is observed that the severity parameter of the model it has a symmetrical
behavior in its distribution, which indicates that there is an appropriate range of
severities for the measurement of teachers' skills. The importance of including this
parameter is that there are characteristics associated with students that inuence
the grade they give to students, such as, for example, gender or the type of
relationship they have with the institution, in this case, it was obtained that
in general, female students are more lenient, as well as, students associated with
graduate programs are also more forgiving than those enrolled in undergraduate
programs.
    About the course parameter, a symmetrical distribution with low variability
is also observed, that is, the majority of parameters are around the value 0.
The inclusion of this parameter in the model is of great importance because this
parameter captures the eect associated with the student's perception of the course
and isolates this eect from the estimation of the teacher's ability parameter.
   On the other hand, the model was evaluated in two ways: First, it was observed
that the model t statistic is close to 0.5 (with a value of 0.41), which indicates
that the model ts the data well. Second, a review of model selection criteria
compared to a model with a fewer parameters model, it was obtained that the
proposed model has lower values in the WAIC and LOO statistics, which is an
indicator that the inclusion of the additional parameter η related to the eect of
the course on the model ts best and is appropriate for the data.
    Taking into account the above, it is concluded that the implementation of
the methodology proposed in this document is very useful, because it statistically
addresses a problem that many institutions face when evaluating their teachers,
this in the sense of improving assessment instruments and improving the teacher
evaluation process itself.


Acknowledgements

   This study was supported by the Universidad Nacional de Colombia, grant
number 36008. It is part of a project focused on the Development and
implementation of a multifaceted item response model for analysis of professor

               Revista Colombiana de Estadística - Theoretical Statistics 44 (2021) 385412

Multi-Faceted Models for Evaluation Professor Performance                              405

evaluation at the Universidad Nacional de Colombia. This is a work of the SICS
Research Group of the Universidad Nacional de Colombia.
                 
                     Received: August 2020  Accepted: June 2021
References

Abrami, P. C., Perry, R. P. & Leventhal, L. (1982), `The relationship between student personality characteristics, teacher ratings, and student achievement', Journal of Educational Psychology 74(1), 111.
Ariyo, O., Quintero, A., Muñoz, J., Verbeke, G. & Lesare, E. (2020), `Bayesian model selection in linear mixed models for longitudinal data', Journal of Applied Statistics 47(5), 890913.
Baker, F. B. & Kim, S.-H. (2004), Item response theory: Parameter estimation techniques, CRC Press.
Barkaoui, K. (2013), `Multifaceted rasch analysis for test evaluation', The companion to language assessment 3, 13011322.
Bartholomew, D. J., Knott, M. & Moustaki, I. (2011), Latent variable models and factor analysis: A unied approach, Vol. 904, John Wiley & Sons.
Basow, S. A. & Silberg, N. T. (1987), `Student evaluations of college professors: Are female and male professors rated dierently?', Journal of educational psychology 79(3), 308.
Becker, W. E. & Watts, M. (1999), `How departments of economics evaluate teaching', American Economic Review 89(2), 344349.
Bélanger, C. H. & Longden, B. (2009), `The eective teacher's characteristics as perceived by students', Tertiary Education and Management 15(4), 323340.
Birnbaum, A. (1968), Statistical Theories of mental test Scores, Reading, MA: Addison Wesley, chapter Trait models and their use in infering an examinee's ability.
Bock, R. D. (1997), `A brief history of item response theory', Educational Measurement: Issues and Practice 16(4), 2132.
Box, G. E. (1980), `Sampling and Bayes' inference in scientic modelling and robustness', Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series A (General) 143(4), 383404.
Braga, M., Paccagnella, M. & Pellizzari, M. (2014), `Evaluating students' evaluations of professors', Economics of Education Review 41, 71-88.
Cameletti, M. & Caviezel, V. (2011), The Cronbach-Mesbah Curve for assessing the unidimensionality oh an item set: the R package CMC, in `International Workshop on Patient reported outcomes and quality of life, 4-5 July 2011, Paris (France)', Vol. 55, Institut de statistique (Paris), pp. 37-40.
Centra, J. A. (1993), Reective Faculty Evaluation:  Enhancing Teaching and Determining Faculty Eectiveness. The Jossey-Bass Higher and Adult Education Series, ERIC.
Centra, J. A. & Creech, F. R. (1976), The relationship between student teachers and course characteristics and student ratings of teacher efectieness, in `Project Report', Princeton, NJ, Educational Testing Service, pp. 76-1.
Cohen, P. A. (1981), `Student ratings of instruction and student achievement: A meta-analysis of multisection validity studies', Review of educational Research 51(3), 281309.
Cordoba, K. (2020), Un modelo TRI de múltiples facetas para la evaluación del desempeño docente en el aula, Master's thesis, Universidad Nacional de Colombia.
Cronbach, L. J. (1951), `Coecient alpha and the internal structure of tests', Psychometrika 16, 297334.
Eckes, T. (2011), `Introduction to many-facet rasch measurement', Franfurt am Main: Peter Lang .
Engelhard, G. (2002), Monitoring raters in performance assessment, Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum, pp. 261287.
Engelhard, G. (2013), Invariant measurement: Using Rasch models in the social, behavioral, and health sciences, New York, NY: Routledge.
Feldman, K. A. (1977), `Consistency and variability among college students in rating their teachers and courses: A review and analysis', Research in Higher Education 6(3), 223274.
Feldman, K. A. (1978), `Course characteristics and college students' ratings of their teachers: What we know and what we don't', Research in Higher Education 9(3), 199-242.
Feldman, K. A. (1979), `The signicance of circumstances for college students' ratings of their teachers and courses', Research in Higher Education 10(2), 149-172.
Feldman, K. A. (1983), `Seniority and experience of college teachers as related to evaluations they receive from students', Research in Higher Education 18(1), 3-124.
Feldman, K. A. (1987), `Research productivity and scholarly accomplishment of college teachers as related to their instructional efectiveness: A review and exploration', Research in higher education 26(3), 227-298.
Feldman, K. A. (1989), `The association between student ratings of specic instructional dimensions and student achievement: Rening and extending the synthesis of data from multisection validity studies', Research in Higher education 30(6), 583-645.
Gelfand, A. E., Dey, D. K. & Chang, H. (1992), Model determination using predictive distributions with implementation via sampling-based methods, Technical report, Stanford University CA Department of statistics.
Gelman, A., Hwang, J. & Vehtari, A. (2014), `Understanding predictive information criteria for bayesian models', Statistics and computing 24(6), 997-1016.
Gelman, A., Meng, X.-L. & Stern, H. (1996), `Posterior predictive assessment of model tness via realized discrepancies', Statistica sinica pp. 733-760.
Gelman, A. et al. (2006), `Prior distributions for variance parameters in hierarchical models (comment on article by browne and draper)', Bayesian analysis 1(3), 515534.
Hollman, M. D. & Gelman, A. (2014), `The no-u-turn sampler: adaptively setting path lengths in hamiltonian monte carlo', Journal of Machine Learning Research 15(1), 15931623.
Jollie, I. (2003), `Principal component analysis', Technometrics 45(3), 276.
Koushki, P. A. & Kunh, H. A. J. (1982), `How realiable are student evaluations of teachers?', Engineering Education 72, 362-367.
Linacre, J. M. (1989), Many-facet Rasch measurement, Chicago: MESA Press.
Lord, F. M. & Novick, M. R. (2008), Statistical theories of mental test scores, IAP.
Luo, Y. & Jiao, H. (2018), `Using the stan program for bayesian item response theory', Educational and psychological measurement 78(3), 384-408.
Marsh, H. W. (1987), `Students' evaluations of university teaching: Research ndings, methodological issues, and directions for future research', International journal of educational research 11(3), 253-388.
Marsh, H. W. (2007), Students' evaluations of university teaching: Dimensionality, reliability, validity, potential biases and usefulness, in `The scholarship of teaching and learning in higher education: An evidence-based perspective', Springer, pp. 319-383.
Martin, E. (1984), `Power and authority in the classroom: Sexist stereotypes in teaching evaluations', Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and Society 9(3), 482-492.
Murray, H. G. (2005), Student evaluation of teaching: Has it made a dierence, in `Annual Meeting of the Society for Teaching and Learning in Higher Education. Charlottetown, Prince Edward Island'.
Neal, R. (2011), MCMC using Hamiltonian dynamics in Handbook of Markov Chain Monte Carlo, New York, NY: CRC Press, pp. 113-162.
Perry, R. P., Niemi, R. R. & Jones, K. (1974), `Eect of prior teaching evaluations and lecture presentation on ratings of teaching performance', Journal of Educational Psychology 66(6), 851.
Philip, B. S. & Richard, F. (2014), `An evaluation of course evaluations', ScienceOpen Research .
Small, A. C., Hollenbeck, A. R. & Haley, R. L. (1982), `The eect of emotional state on student ratings of instructors', Teaching of Psychology 9(4), 205-211.
Spencer, P. A. & Flyr, M. L. (1992), `The formal evaluation as an impetus to classroom change: Myth or reality?'.
Stan Development Team (2020a), `RStan: the R interface to Stan'. R package version 2.19.3. http://mc-stan.org/
Stan Development Team (2020b), `Stan language reference manual'. Version 2.22. http://mc-stan.org
Stan Development Team (2020c), `Stan user's guide'. Version 2.22. http://mc-stan.org
Uttl, B., Eche, A., Fast, O., Mathison, B., Valladares Montemayor, H. & Raab, V. (2012), `Student evaluation of instruction/teaching (sei/set) review', Calgary, AB, Canada: Mount Royal Faculty Association Retrieved from: http://mrfa. net/les/MRFA_SEI_Review_v6. pdf .
Uttl, B., White, C. A. & Gonzalez, D. W. (2017), `Meta-analysis of faculty's teaching eectiveness: Student evaluation of teaching ratings and student learning are not related', Studies in Educational Evaluation 54, 22-42.
Vehtari, A., Gelman, A. & Gabry, J. (2017), `Practical bayesian model evaluation using leave-one-out cross-validation and waic', Statistics and computing 27(5), 14131432.
Wachtel, H. K. (1998), `Student evaluation of college teaching eectiveness: A brief review', Assessment & Evaluation in Higher Education 23(2), 191212.
Watanabe, S. (2010), `Asymptotic equivalence of bayes cross validation and widely applicable information criterion in singular learning theory', Journal of Machine Learning Research 11(Dec), 35713594.


Appendix A. Questionnaire used to Measure

                      Professor Performance

   The original scale was 1 2 3 4 5. Categories 1 and 2 were merged, so, in the
end, there were 4 categories for each question.


               Revista Colombiana de Estadística - Theoretical Statistics 44 (2021) 385412

Multi-Faceted Models for Evaluation Professor Performance                              409

  1. Does the professor attend classes regularly and punctually?

  2. Does the professor respect the agreed dates for academic activities, including
     evaluations and delivery of results?

  3. Does the professor prepare each of the sessions of the course beforehand?

  4. Is the professor accessible and willing to provide academic help?

  5. Does the professor encourage group work, recognizing student successes and
     achievements during learning activities?

  6. Does the professor demonstrate commitment and enthusiasm in their
     teaching activities?

  7. Do you consider the content of the subject to be clear and specic?

  8. Does the professor include learning experiences in places other than the
     classroom (e.g., workshops, laboratories, companies, the community, etc.)?

  9. Does the professor organize activities that allow students to exercise oral and
     written expression?

 10. Does the professor develop the content of the class in an orderly and
     understandable manner?

 11. Does the professor promote self-study and research?

 12. Does the professor use technology (e.g., computer, video beam, digital
     platforms, e-mail, etc.) as a means to facilitate student learning?

 13. Does the professor promote the use of various digital tools to manage (collect,
     process, evaluate and use) information?

 14. Does the professor promote the safe, legal and ethical use of digital
     information?

 15. In general, the professor's performance was?



Appendix B. Stan Code for Estimating Professor

                      Performance


    A Stan program is organized in a sequence of blocks, whose contents are
declarations of variables. Each component of the model for the code in Stan
is described below (Luo & Jiao, 2018).


               Revista Colombiana de Estadística - Theoretical Statistics 44 (2021) 385412

410                             Karen Rosana Cordoba & Alvaro Mauricio Montenegro

Data block
    Data block is the rst component in a Stan code. The required data for model
estimation is specied there. In this work, information related to the number of
responses, professors, students, items and categories for the item, the number of
courses and the responses must be specied in this section. The code used for the
data block is listed below:

1 data{
2     int<lower=1> N;                        // # of responses
3     int<lower=10> N_prof;                  // # of professors
4     int<lower=10> N_stud;                 // # of students
5     int<lower=2> N_item;                   // # of items
6     int<lower=2,upper=5> N_cat;            // # of categories by item
7     int<lower=10> N_sub;                    // # of courses
8     int<lower=1,upper=N_cat> y[N];         // y[n], n-th response
9     int<lower=1,upper=N_prof> professor[N];// Response professor n
10    int<lower=1,upper=N_item> item[N];     // Response item n
11    int<lower=1,upper=N_stud> student[N]; // Response student n
12    int<lower=1,upper=N_sub> subject[N]; // Response course n
13    }


Parameter block
    In this block the model parameters are specied. For the context of multi-
faceted TRI models,item, performance, course and severity parameters must be
specied. On the other hand, it is also necessary to specify the hyper-parameters
associated to the variances in the model. The variables declared in this block
correspond to the variables to be sampled. The following code was used in this
work.

14    parameters{
15      vector[N_prof] theta;         // Latent trait of the professor
16      vector[N_stud] gamma;         // Student severity
17      vector[N_sub] eta;            // Course parameter
18      ordered[N_cat-1] beta[N_item];// Item parameters
19      real<lower=0> sigma_eta;      // Deviation of the parameter eta
20      real<lower=0> sigma_gamma;    // Deviation of the parameter gamma
21      real<lower=0> sigma_beta;     // Deviation of the parameters beta
22    }


Model block
    In this block the model is implemented. All prior distributions and the
likelihood are declared in this section. The model block of our model is as follows.

23    model{
24      theta ~ normal(0,1);                     // Prior of latent traits


                Revista Colombiana de Estadística - Theoretical Statistics 44 (2021) 385412

Multi-Faceted Models for Evaluation Professor Performance                              411

25    eta ~ normal(0,sigma_eta);         // Prior of course parameter
26    gamma ~ normal(0,sigma_gamma);     // Prior of severity parameter
27    for(j in 1:N_item){
28      beta[j] ~ normal(0,sigma_beta);// Prior of item parameters
29    }
30    sigma_beta ~ cauchy(0,2); // Hyer-prior for sigma_beta
31    sigma_gamma ~ cauchy(0,2); // Hyper-prior for sigma_gamma
32    sigma_eta ~ cauchy(0,2);    // Hyper-prior for sigma_eta
33    for(n in 1:N){
34      y[n] ~ ordered_logistic(theta[professor[n]]-eta[subject[n]]
35             -gamma[student[n]], beta[item[n]]); //likelihood
36    }
37   }


Generated quantities block
    This block does not aect the values of the sampled parameters. If a quantity
does not play a role in the model, it must be dened in the block of generated
quantities. In this case the associated log-likelihood is calculated. Our code is as
follows.

38 generated quantities{
39     vector[N] log_lik; // Log-likelihood vector
40       for(n in 1:N){
41         log_lik[n] = ordered_logistic_lpmf(y[n]|theta[professor[n]]
-eta[subject[n]]-gamma[student[n]], beta[item[n]]); // log-likelihood
42   }
43 }


Appendix C. Estimated Item Parameters in Profes-

                      sor Performance Measurement

   Table 2 shows the results obtained from the estimation process of the item
transformed parameters, using Stan The R̂ statistics was omitted, because all its
values are very close to 1.




               Revista Colombiana de Estadística - Theoretical Statistics 44 (2021) 385412

412                               Karen Rosana Cordoba & Alvaro Mauricio Montenegro

Table 2: Estimate β -parameters of professor performance, computed by Stan. Column
                 b is omited. All values are very close to 1.00. Column n e is the
          Rhat (R)
          eective sample size.
      Parameter     Mean     Std. Dev.    q2.5    q25     q50     q75     q97.5   n_e
        β1,1        -4,23       0,21      -4,62   -4,37   -4,23   -4,09   -3,83   657,18
        β1,2        -2,81       0,18      -3,16   -2,94   -2,81   -2,69   -2,46   526,27
        β1,3        -0,73       0,17      -1,07   -0,85   -0,73   -0,62   -0,40   442,49
        β2,1        -4,75       0,22      -5,19   -4,90   -4,74   -4,59   -4,32   720,17
        β2,2        -3,14       0,18      -3,50   -3,26   -3,14   -3,01   -2,78   519,68
        β2,3        -1,17       0,17      -1,51   -1,29   -1,18   -1,06   -0,84   465,72
        β3,1        -4,72       0,22      -5,15   -4,87   -4,72   -4,57   -4,29   715,35
        β3,2        -3,12       0,18      -3,48   -3,25   -3,12   -2,99   -2,76   520,17
        β3,3        -1,31       0,17      -1,64   -1,43   -1,31   -1,19   -0,98   474,06
        β4,1        -4,14       0,20      -4,54   -4,28   -4,14   -4,00   -3,76   538,25
        β4,2        -2,36       0,18      -2,70   -2,48   -2,36   -2,24   -2,02   477,77
        β4,3        -0,43       0,17      -0,75   -0,55   -0,43   -0,31   -0,10   452,42
        β5,1        -3,13       0,18      -3,48   -3,25   -3,13   -3,00   -2,76   477,28
        β5,2        -1,49       0,17      -1,83   -1,61   -1,49   -1,37   -1,16   447,19
        β5,3         0,20       0,17      -0,12   0,09    0,20    0,32    0,53    435,69
        β6,1        -4,19       0,20      -4,58   -4,33   -4,19   -4,05   -3,80   599,74
        β6,2        -2,51       0,18      -2,86   -2,64   -2,51   -2,39   -2,17   452,54
        β6,3        -0,49       0,17      -0,82   -0,61   -0,50   -0,37   -0,17   435,13
        β7,1        -0,34       0,17      -0,67   -0,46   -0,34   -0,23   -0,01   450,46
        β7,2         0,62       0,17      0,29    0,51    0,62    0,74    0,95    444,26
        β7,3         1,76       0,17      1,43    1,64    1,76    1,88    2,09    457,30
        β8,1        -1,24       0,17      -1,57   -1,36   -1,24   -1,13   -0,91   456,98
        β8,2         0,10       0,17      -0,23   -0,02   0,10    0,22    0,43    443,21
        β8,3         1,76       0,17      1,43    1,64    1,76    1,87    2,09    460,74
        β9,1        -3,26       0,19      -3,63   -3,39   -3,26   -3,14   -2,90   512,49
        β9,2        -1,69       0,17      -2,03   -1,81   -1,69   -1,57   -1,35   432,42
        β9,3         0,31       0,17      -0,02   0,19    0,30    0,42    0,63    434,23
        β10,1       -3,67       0,19      -4,04   -3,81   -3,67   -3,54   -3,30   537,18
        β10,2       -1,88       0,17      -2,21   -2,00   -1,88   -1,76   -1,54   426,88
        β10,3        0,15       0,17      -0,18   0,03    0,15    0,26    0,48    424,03
        β11,1       -2,08       0,17      -2,42   -2,20   -2,08   -1,96   -1,75   469,91
        β11,2       -1,14       0,17      -1,47   -1,26   -1,14   -1,02   -0,82   437,02
        β11,3       -0,03       0,17      -0,36   -0,15   -0,03   0,08    0,30    447,72
        β12,1       -2,16       0,17      -2,50   -2,28   -2,16   -2,03   -1,82   469,99
        β12,2       -0,69       0,17      -1,02   -0,81   -0,69   -0,58   -0,36   452,13
        β12,3        0,89       0,17      0,57    0,77    0,89    1,01    1,22    465,29
        β13,1       -2,81       0,18      -3,15   -2,93   -2,81   -2,68   -2,47   474,87
        β13,2       -1,70       0,17      -2,04   -1,82   -1,70   -1,59   -1,37   446,79
        β13,3       -0,14       0,17      -0,47   -0,26   -0,14   -0,02   0,19    453,58
        β14,1       -4,17       0,20      -4,56   -4,31   -4,17   -4,03   -3,78   573,60
        β14,2       -2,25       0,18      -2,59   -2,37   -2,25   -2,13   -1,90   449,51
        β14,3        0,64       0,17      0,32    0,52    0,64    0,76    0,96    439,46




                  Revista Colombiana de Estadística - Theoretical Statistics 44 (2021) 385412

