Linking the Negative Binomial and Logarithmic Series Distributions via their Associated Series
Universidad Nacional de Colombia
Abstract
The negative binomial distribution is associated to the series obtained by taking derivatives of the logarithmic series. Conversely, the logarithmic series distribution is associated to the series found by integrating the series associated to the negative binomial distribution. The parameter of the number of failures of the negative binomial distribution is the number of derivatives needed to obtain the negative binomial series from the loga0rithmic series. The reasoning in this article could be used as an alternative method to prove that the probability mass function of the negative binomial distribution sums to one. Finally, an interpretation of the logarithmic series distribution is given by using the presented reasoning.
Key words: Convergent series, Logarithmic series distribution, Negative binomial distribution, Power series distributions.
Introduction
In statistical literature, many pages have been dedicated finding relations between probability distributions. For example, Casella & Berger (2002) present an interesting diagram that illustrates the relationships between several common distributions through transformations or limits. Recently, an extension of this diagram has been presented by Leemis & McQueston (2008). Their paper shows the relationships among 76 univariate probability distributions: 19 discrete and 57 continuous.
The relations between some common discrete distributions with infinite sup-
port are well known since the work of Quenouille (1949), who showed the links
between the logarithmic series, Poisson, and negative binomial distributions. Also
Anscombe (1950) carries out several investigations in order to establish relations
between the negative binomial and logarithmic series distributions by finding their
sampling properties. He also presents the method for parameter estimation and
some tests for departure from these distributions.

    Power series have been used to find properties of discrete distributions. For
example, Samaniego (1992) uses the geometric series and related equalities to find
the moments of the geometric distribution. In another way, P      Casella & Berger
                                                                    ∞
(2002, p. 74) use the method of taking derivatives of the series n=0 (1 − π)π n to
find the mean of the geometric distribution. Following these type of reasonings,
this paper uses the idea first presented by Noack (1950) of associating a convergent
power series to a probability mass function (pmf) of some infinite discrete random
variable.

    Though probability distributions model real situations, their mathematical ex-
pressions are sometimes connected. In this paper, integrals and derivatives of the
series associated to the negative binomial and logarithmic series distributions are
used to find the relationship between these distributions. In Section 3 the param-
eter of the number of failures of the negative binomial distribution is found to
be the number of derivatives of the logarithmic series needed to find the negative
binomial series. The work in Section 3 can be also used to prove that the pmf of
the negative binomial distribution sums to one. In Section 4 the above parameter
is found to be related to the number of integrals taken from the series associated
to a negative binomial distribution with a major parameter.

   The relationship between the logarithmic series distribution and the negative
binomial is not as explicit as the relation between the geometric distribution and
the negative binomial distribution. However, many authors have showed the exis-
tent relationship through different ways (Fisher et al. 1943, Anscombe 1950, Ord
1967). The method explained here provides a simple way to find this relationship,
which is presented in Section 4.

  At the end of this article it is shown a diagram inspired by the work of Leemis
& McQueston (2008) that summarizes the ideas presented.

                                    Revista Colombiana de Estadística 31 (2008) 311–319

Linking the Negative Binomial and Logarithmic Series Distributions                        313

2. From Convergent Power Series to Probability Mass
   Functions

   Suppose that you have a convergent power series, i.e.

                                      ∞
                                      X
                                            an xn = L(x)
                                      n=l


with an depending only on n, and x a real number in the convergence interval
(−r, r). Then, it is possible to establish an associated pmf of some infinitely
discrete random variable as follows

                                          an xn
                                      (
                                          L(x) ,     if n = l, l + 1, . . . ;
                        P (n | x) =                                                       (1)
                                          0,         otherwise.

provided that an xn /L(x) ≥ 0 for all n. See the papers of Noack (1950) and Khatri
(1959) for a general discussion about this distribution and its properties with l = 0,
and the paper of Patil (1962) in which he introduces the generalized power series
distribution when n varies within an arbitrary non-null subset of non-negative
integers.
                                             P∞
Example 1. It is well known that the series n=0 xn /n! converges to ex , for all
x. If x > 0, then e−x xn /n! > 0 for n = 0, 1, 2, . . ., and the pmf of the Poisson
distribution is obtained.

    In this paper we work with convergent series for x ∈ (0, 1) which denotes a
non-trivial probability of success in a Bernoulli trial. To follow a classical notation
let us replace x by π.
   For the developments presented in the following sections, take into account
that if a power series converges for all π ∈ (0, 1), then, also for all π ∈ (0, 1),

                        ∞            ∞            ∞
                     d X            X      ∂     X
                           an π n =     an π n =     an nπ n−1
                    dπ n=0          n=0
                                          ∂π     n=0


and
              Z   ∞                 ∞                           ∞
                                                                    an n+1
                  X                 X           Z              X
                           n
                        an π dπ =          an       π n dπ =           π   +c
                  n=0               n=0                        n=0
                                                                   n+1


    This is obtained from general theorems about power series. See, e.g., Apostol
(1988, p. 529) and Casella & Berger (2002, p. 74) for results about convergent
series.

                                           Revista Colombiana de Estadística 31 (2008) 311–319

314                                                                      Mauricio Sadinle

3. From the Logarithmic Series to the Negative
   Binomial Distribution
   The logarithmic series pmf is given by
                                        πn
                     P (n | π) =                 ,     n = 1, 2, . . .
                                   −n log(1 − π)
with π ∈ (0, 1). Its associated power series is

                     π2   π3   π4        πn
                π+      +    +    + ···+    + · · · = − log(1 − π)                    (2)
                     2    3    4         n
   Taking derivatives of this series with respect to π, the geometric series
                                                               1
                     1 + π + π2 + π3 + · · · + πn + · · · =                           (3)
                                                              1−π
is found.
   Multiplying both sides by (1 − π), it is found that

            (1 − π) + (1 − π)π + (1 − π)π 2 + · · · + (1 − π)π n + · · · = 1

where the generic term of this series, (1 − π)π n , is the pmf of the well known
geometric distribution, where n = 0, 1, 2, . . . represents the number of successes
before the first failure in a sequence of independent Bernoulli trials with parameter
π.
   Now let us take derivatives at both sides of (3)
                                                                        1
            1 + 2π + 3π 2 + · · · + nπ n−1 + (n + 1)π n + · · · =                     (4)
                                                                    (1 − π)2

and following (1), i.e. in this case by multiplying by (1 − π)2 , one finds a series
which sums to 1 with generic term
                                                           
                       2 n     n+1            2 n    2+n−1
       (n + 1)(1 − π) π =              (1 − π) π =               (1 − π)2 π n
                                 1                     2−1
which is the pmf of the negative binomial distribution with parameters 2 and π,
for n = 0, 1, 2, . . . . Again, let us take derivatives of (4)
                                                                                   2
 2 + 3 × 2π + 4 × 3π 2 + · · · + (n + 1)nπ n−1 + (n + 2)(n + 1)π n + · · · =
                                                                               (1 − π)3
and the associated pmf is found to be, again as in (1),
                                                           
   (n + 2)(n + 1)        3 n     n+2            3 n      3+n−1
                  (1 − π) π =           (1 − π) π =             (1 − π)3 π n
          2                        2                      3−1
for n = 0, 1, 2, . . . which is the pmf of the negative binomial distribution with
parameters 3 and π.

                                       Revista Colombiana de Estadística 31 (2008) 311–319

Linking the Negative Binomial and Logarithmic Series Distributions                    315

     Following this idea, taking k derivatives at each side of (2), one finds the series
from which the negative binomial distribution with parameters k and π can be
obtained. Given the previous work, to demonstrate this result (by mathematical
induction), we need to assume that the result is true for k and demonstrate that
it is true for k + 1, as follows:
     Suppose that by taking k derivatives of (2) we find the series
                    k!    (k + 1)! 2       (k + n − 1)! n        (k − 1)!
       (k − 1)! +      π+         π + ···+             π + ··· =                      (5)
                    1!       2!                 n!               (1 − π)k
which is associated to the negative binomial distribution with parameters k and
π, following (1)
                                                           
                    (k + n − 1)!                  k+n−1
                                  (1 − π)k π n =              (1 − π)k π n
                      (k − 1)!n!                     k−1
for n = 0, 1, 2, . . . . Let us take derivatives of (5) with respect to π
               (k + 1)!    (k + 2)! 2       (k + n)! n            k!
        k! +            π+         π + ···+         π + ··· =
                  1!          2!               n!             (1 − π)k+1

   Following (1) we obtain
                       
                   k+n
                           (1 − π)k+1 π n ,        for n = 0, 1, 2, . . .
                     k
which is the pmf of the negative binomial distribution with parameters k + 1 and
π, and the result is demonstrated.
    As stated above, taking the generic term of the series and dividing it by the
sum of the series, we find the associated pmf. If instead of this if we take all
the series and divide it by its sum, we will find a proof that the associated pmf
sums to one. This could be useful if we start, for instance, from the widely known
convergence of the geometric series, following the steps of this section we find the
series associated to the negative binomial distribution and dividing by its sum, we
demonstrate that the pmf of this distribution sums to one.
    Casella & Berger (2002, p. 95) mentions that the traditional proof of the fact
that the negative binomial pmf sums to one utilizes an extension of the binomial
theorem that includes negative exponents. This usual proof leads to the use of
binomial coefficients with negative integers, which is not taught in regular calculus
courses and which many people find difficult to handle. Thus, the above results can
be used to present a more pedagogical way to prove that the pmf of the negative
binomial distribution sums to one.


4. From the Negative Binomial to the Logarithmic
   Series Distribution
    In the previous section we found that by taking derivatives of the series asso-
ciated to the negative binomial distribution with parameters k and π, the series

                                       Revista Colombiana de Estadística 31 (2008) 311–319

316                                                                      Mauricio Sadinle

associated to the negative binomial distribution with parameters k + 1 and π is
obtained.
    Conversely, taking the series associated to the negative binomial with para-
meters k and π and integrating it, it can be found the series associated to the
negative binomial with parameters k − 1 and π, taking the constant of integration
to be equal to (k − 2)! in the side of the series and zero in the side of the sum.
This means that if we are studying the probability of getting n successes before
k failures, and if we integrate the associated series, we will obtain a series with
an associated pmf for studying the probability of getting n successes before k − 1
failures.
     The geometric pmf, which is equivalent to the negative binomial pmf with
parameters 1 and π, has associated the geometric series, and from the above idea,
it is natural to think of integrating it to find a way of modeling the probability of
getting n successes, taking the parameter of the number of failures as zero. The
constant of integration (k − 2)! = (1 − 2)! = (−1)! is not defined, so for convenience
it is taken as zero in this case, and the following series is obtained

                        π2   π3         πn
                   π+      +    + ··· +    + · · · = − log(1 − π)
                        2    3          n

   This series has the associated pmf

                              πn
                                       ,      for n = 1, 2, . . .
                         −n log(1 − π)

which is the logarithmic series pmf. The interpretation of the above distribution
is not simple. In fact, this distribution is a limit case of the negative binomial
distribution, and it is found by Fisher et al. (1943) through a different reasoning. It
is also presented by Anscombe (1950) as a limiting process of the negative binomial
distribution by considering a sample of N Bernoulli trials (N 6= 0), letting N tend
to infinity and k to zero in terms of the Gamma function, as follows

                    Γ(k + n)
                             (1 − π)k π n ,     for n = 0, 1, 2, . . .
                     n!Γ(k)

    Ord (1967), by graphical methods, found in a natural way that the logarithmic
series distribution occurs as the limit of the negative binomial, when the parameter
of the number of failures tends to zero.


5. Conclusions
    The parameter of the number of failures of the negative binomial distribution
is the number of derivatives needed to obtain the negative binomial series from
the logarithmic series. Thus the negative binomial pmf with parameters k and π
is found by
Figure 1: Relationships between logarithmic series distribution LogS(π), geometric dis-
          tribution G(π) and negative binomial distribution N B(n, π).

    Conversely, this idea can be applied by replacing derivatives by i integrals
with the analogous terms of the series associated to the negative binomial with
parameters k and π. For i = k − k ′ we can find the negative binomial with
parameters k ′ and π, for 1 < k ′ < k. For i = k − 1 we can find the geometric
distribution, and finally, for i = k we can find the logarithmic series distribution.
Do not forget to take into account the appropriate integration constants.
   The logarithmic series distribution is interpreted by using the presented method
as a distribution for modeling the probability of getting n successes letting the
number of failures of the negative binomial experiment tend to zero, as shown by
Ord (1967).
    Figure 1 shows the relationships between the different pmf of the above men-
tioned distributions. The link to go from one distribution to another one follows
the next algorithm. First, choose a given pmf. Second, find the associated series
to such pmf. Third, either differentiate or integrate that series as many times
as needed to obtain the series associated to the pmf wanted. Fourth, divide the
general term of the obtained series by its summation.
    For instance, the first derivative of the geometric series, associated to the geo-
metric distribution, produces the series associated to the negative binomial distri-
bution with parameters 2 and π. While integrating once and taking the integration
constant as zero, produces the logarithmic series, associated to the logarithmic se-
ries distribution. Similarly, if one would like to obtain the negative binomial pmf
with parameters 3 and π from the geometric series, thus one should differentiate
it twice and finally divide the general term of the series found by the summation.
    Finally, if you do not follow the fourth step in the algorithm above, and instead
of this you divide the series obtained in the third step by its sum, you will find
a way to prove that the pmf, of the distribution associated to the series, sums to
one.


Acknowledgments
   The author would like to thank A. Villamarín, S. Granada and R. Herrera for
reading the preliminary versions of this paper and F. H. Nieto for his suggestions.
The author also appreciates the very helpful comments offered by the referees and
the editor.
References
Anscombe F J.Sampling Theory of the Negative Binomial and Logarithmic Series Distributions.(1950).Biometrika.
Apostol T M.Calculus.(1988).Reverté.
Casella G,Berger R L.Statistical Inference.(2002).Duxbury Thomson Learning.USA.
Fisher R A,Corbet A S,Williams C B.The Relation between the Number of Species and the Number of Individuals in a Random Sample of an Animal Population.(1943).The Journal of Animal Ecology.
Khatri C G.On Certain Properties of Power-Series Distributions.(1959).Biometrika.
Leemis L M,McQueston J T.Univariate Distribution Relationships.(2008).The American Statistician.
Noack A.A Class of Random Variables with Discrete Distributions.(1950).The Annals of Mathematical Statistics.
Ord J K.Graphical Methods for a Class of Discrete Distributions.(1967).Journal of the Royal Statistical Society.
Patil G P.On Homogeneity and Combined Estimation for the Generalized Power Series Distribution and Certain Applications.(1962).Biometrics.
Quenouille M H.A Relation between the Logarithmic, Poisson, and Negative Binomial Series.(1949).Biometrics.
Samaniego F J.Elementary Derivations of Geometric Moments.(1992).The American Statistician.