Bayesian Analysis of the Heterogeneity of Literary Style. Análisis bayesiano de la heterogeneidad del estilo literario
Technical University of Catalonia, Barcelona, Spain
Abstract
We proposed statistical analysis of the heterogeneity of literary style in a set of texts that simultaneously use different stylometric characteristics, like word length and the frequency of function words. The data set consists of several tables with the same number of rows, with the i-th row of all tables corresponding to the i-th text. The analysis proposed clusters the rows of all these tables simultaneously into groups with homogeneous style, based on a finite mixture of sets of multinomial models, one set for each table. Different from the usual heuristic cluster analysis approaches, our method naturally incorporates the text size, the discrete nature of the data, and the dependence between categories in the analysis. The model is checked and chosen with the help of posterior predictive checks, together with the use of closed form expressions for the posterior probabilities that each of the models considered to be appropriate. This is illustrated through an analysis of the heterogeneity in Shakespeare’s plays, and by revisiting the authorshipattribution problem of Tirant lo Blanc.
Key words: Authorship, Cluster analysis, Multinomial distribution.
Resumen
Se propone un análisis estadístico para modelar la heterogeneidad del estilo literario en un conjunto de textos, para ello se utilizan simultáneamente diferentes características estilométricas, como longitud de palabra y la frecuencia de palabras función. Los datos consisten en varias tablas con el mismo número de filas, donde la fila i-ésima corresponde al texto i-ésimo. El análisis propuesto agrupa las filas de todas estas tablas simultáneamente en grupos de estilo homogéneo, en base a una mezcla finita de modelos multinomiales. El modelo propuesto tiene la ventaja sobre los análisis de conglomerados heurísticos habituales, de incorporar de forma natural el tamaño del texto, la naturaleza discreta de los datos y la dependencia entre las categorías. El modelo se selecciona y válida con la ayuda de simulaciones de la distribución predictiva a posteriori, junto con el uso de las expresiones en forma cerrada para la probabilidad a posteriori de cada uno de los modelos de mezcla considerados. Todo ello se ilustra a través de un análisis de la heterogeneidad en las obras de Shakespeare, y revisitando el problema de atribución de autoría del texto Tirant lo Blanc.
Palabras clave: análisi de conglomerados, atribución, distribución multinomial.



1. Introduction
    The statistical analysis of literary style has often been used to characterize
the style of texts and authors, and to help settle authorship-attribution problems
both in the academic as well as in the legal context. Mendenhall (1887, 1901)
has used word length and sentence length to characterize literary style. Other
characteristics widely used for this purpose have been the proportion of nouns,
articles, adjectives or adverbs; the frequency of use of function words, which are
independent of the context, or of characters; and the richness and diversity of the
vocabulary used by the author. Good reviews on the statistical analysis of literary
style can be found in Holmes (1985, 1994, 1998, 1999) and Stamatatatos (2009).
    The range of statistical methods used in this setting is wide, and the most
often involve the use of classification tools. In authorship-attribution problems
the researcher has a set of candidate authors and a list of texts from each of these
authors, and it is necessary to assign texts of an unknown author to one of the
authors in the training set by comparing their style to the one of the training texts.
In this settings, discriminant analysis should be used. A recent presentation of the
Bayesian approach to this problem can be found in Puig, Font & Ginebra (2016).
    In the analysis of the heterogeneity of literary style that is tackled in this
paper, the setting is a lot less structured because we did not have a reference set
of candidate authors and of training texts, and so we used of cluster analysis.
   The goal of cluster analysis is to partition observations (texts) into meaningful
subgroups, without assuming much about the number of subgroups and about the
composition of the groups. Most of the literature on cluster analysis is devoted to
continuous data and uses ad hoc heuristic partitioning algorithms that tend to be
easy to apply and work well, but do not allow to be assessed cluster uncertainties
and do not provide inference based methods to choose the number of clusters
and allocate individual observations to clusters. Good introductions to cluster
analysis can be found in are Greenacre (1988), Kaufman & Rousseeuw (1990),
Gnanadesikan (1997), and Gordon (1999).


                                       Revista Colombiana de Estadística 39 (2016) 205–227

Bayesian Analysis of the Heterogeneity of Literary Style                             207

    Model based clustering assumes that observations come from a population with
several subpopulations, and the overall population is modeled through a finite mix-
ture of the subpopulation models. Bayesian model based cluster analysis provides
a complete probabilistic framework for the problem by assuming a finite mix-
ture model under which observations belonging to the same cluster have the same
distribution, and then the mixed distributions are estimated and observations to
these component distributions are assigned. Model based approaches simultane-
ously group objects and estimate the component parameters, and this avoids the
biases appearing if it is done separately. These methods also have the advantage
of providing a measure of the uncertainty by allocating individual observations
into clusters, and by casting the choice of the number of clusters and hence of
component distributions as a statistical model selection problem.
   For early examples of the use of Bayesian model based cluster analysis, mostly
using mixtures of multivariate normal distributions, see Murtagh & Raftery (1984),
Banfield & Raftery (1993), Fernandez & Green (2002), and Fernandez & Green
(2002).
    To help settle the debate around the authorship of Tirant lo Blanc, Giron,
Ginebra & Riba (2005) explored the heterogeneity of its style by carrying out a
Bayesian model based cluster analysis of word length and of the frequency of the
most frequent words in its chapters. The data consisted of two contingency tables
of ordered rows, with the i-th row in both tables corresponding to the i-th chapter
of the book, and the cluster analysis of the rows of each one of these two tables
was carried out separately based on a finite mixture of multinomial models. By
using these models to implement a cluster analysis, the texts classified based on
the whole vector of word length or of function word counts instead of using only
individual counts. This also has the advantage over heuristic and/or normal based
clustering approaches in that it naturally incorporates the text size, the discrete
nature of the data and the dependence between categories in the analysis.
      This analysis, based on finite mixtures of multinomial models, is generalized
by:

   1. carrying out a single cluster analysis that uses more than one stylometric
      characteristic and, by treating a set of more than one vector of counts as an
      observation,
   2. by incorporating a model-checking stage that compares the realization of
      statistics in the data with their realization in predictive simulations from
      the models, and
   3. by providing closed form expressions for the exact calculation of the proba-
      bilities of the models considered to be correct, that are to be used to select
      models. There are used instead of the approximations based on the BIC that
      are typically used in model based cluster analysis.

The combination of the model-checking and model selection stages will help de-
termine the number of mixture components required by the data, and hence, the
number of clusters.


                                      Revista Colombiana de Estadística 39 (2016) 205–227

208                                          Marti Font, Xavier Puig & Josep Ginebra


    As a by product of the model-checking stage, the analysis allows us to check
whether finite mixtures of a small number of purely multinomial models are flex-
ible enough to capture all the variability in the data. If they are not, it would
be necessary to resort to more complicated finite mixtures of sets of continuous
mixtures of multinomial models instead.
    To illustrate the methodology, we used two examples. The first case study
explores the heterogeneity of style in the plays in the first folio edition of Shake-
speare’s drama, and in the second, the authorship-attribution problem of Tirant
lo Blanc is explored. In the examples, the analysis will be mostly exploratory,
and we will not assess if the heterogeneities found are linked to differences in au-
thorship could be explained by differences in chronology, genre or topic. Without
making a list of candidate authors and of training texts explicit, there is no le-
gitimate statistical way of going beyond proposing tentative explanations for the
heterogeneities detected in the corpus.



2. Description of the Data
    The methodology presented here combines as many stylometric characteristics
is necessary. All the characteristics will involve counting features that have a fixed
number of categories. This includes, for example, counting characters, words or
sentences of certain lengths, function words, nouns or adjectives. Therefore, data
will consist of a set of tables with the same number of rows, with one table for each
characteristic. We use word length and the count of the most frequent function
words as illustrating examples.
    Early uses of word length can be found in Mendenhall (1901), Mosteller &
Wallace (1984), Brinegar (1963), Bruno (1974), Williams (1975), Morton (1978),
Smith (1983) and in Hilton & Holmes (1993). Word length is rarely useful in
authorship attribution of texts written in English, but Giron et al. (2005) found it
to be very useful in the authorship attribution of a text in Catalan. Furthermore,
in the first case study, we found that word length is a good discriminator well
between Shakespeare’s comedies on one side and histories and tragedies on the
other. Therefore word length could be useful to detect heterogeneities of style in
English texts that are not necessarily linked to differences in authorship.
   The frequency of use of function words has proved to be one of the best tools
when it comes to discriminating styles. Recent examples of the use of function
words can be found in Holmes (1992), Binongo (1994), Oakes (1998), Zhao &
Zobel (2005), Miranda-Garcia & Calle-Martin (2007), Luyckx (2010) and Rybicki
& Eder (2011).
   In those cases in which the analysis of word length and the analysis of word
counts separately used lead to very different results, their combination will be
problematic. However when they lead to similar results when used separately,
as was found to be the case in Tirant lo Blanc by Giron et al. (2005), their
combination in a single analysis is warranted. This is because it helps to reduce
the uncertainty in the classification of texts into clusters.


                                     Revista Colombiana de Estadística 39 (2016) 205–227

Bayesian Analysis of the Heterogeneity of Literary Style                                209

    If a researcher decides to simultaneously analyze word length and function word
counts in Tirant lo Blanc it leads to the simultaneous analysis of the 487×10 table
of word length counts and of the 487 × 12 table of counts of twelve of the most
frequent function words partially presented in Table 1.

Table 1: Extract of the table of word length counts in the chapters of Tirant lo Blanc,
         and of the table of counts of twelve of the most frequent function words in
         them. Ni1 is the total number of words and wli the average word length.
                                    Word length counts
   Chapter     1     2     3     4      5     6     7       8     9    10+    Ni1   wli
      1       21     59   44    19     33    20    16      17     9     17    285   4.47
      2       53    113   80    49     52    33    28      36    16     16    476   4.14
     ...      ...   ...   ...   ...   ...   ...    ...    ...    ...   ...    ...   ...
     487      48     49   62    53     41    36    21      9     16     13    348   4.20
                                 Most frequent word counts
   Chapter     e    de     la   que    no     l   com    molt     és     jo    si    dix
      1       12    15      9    8      1     7     2      1      6       0    3      0
      2       26    28    19     9      3     2     3       8     3      1     3      1
     ...      ...   ...   ...   ...   ...   ...    ...    ...    ...    ...   ...    ...
     487      29    13      8   10      2    10     3       9     0      0     0      0


    In general, for each chapter i in a book (or act of a play) with i = 1, . . . , n,
and each stylometric characteristic, r, with r = 1, . . . , R, one has a vector valued
                                  r
categorical observation, yir = (yi1            r
                                    , . . . , yik(r) ), where k(r) denotes the number of
categories of the r-th characteristic. This vector, yir , becomes the i-th row of the
r-th table considered.
   In the Tirant lo Blanc example, yi1 is the ten dimensional vector of word length
counts of its i-th chapter, and yi2 is the twelve dimensional vector of function word
counts in that chapter. More generally, this leads to a set of R different n × k(r)
tables: one table for each characteristic. The set of all the n rows in the r-th
table will be denoted by y r = (y1r , . . . , ynr ), and the set of all the R tables will be
denoted by y = (y 1 , . . . , y R ). The goal is to cluster the rows of all these tables
simultaneously into S different groups with homogeneous style, assuming that the
rows in a group are multinomially distributed.
    One of the main shortcomings of the heuristic based cluster analysis approach
typically used in stylometry, such as the ones based on PCA, k-means or hier-
archical methods, is that they implicitly assume data to be continuous or are at
least tailored to work best when data is continuous. However, stylometric data is
mostly categorical, and the methodology to be used should move in the direction
that address the specificities of that kind of data.
    Specifically; most of these ad-hoc heuristic methods have problems taking into
account that texts of different lengths have different amounts of information re-
garding the style of their author and, hence, they should be weighted differently
in the analysis. These basic methods also have problems taking into considera-
tion the dependence present between the category counts of the same stylometric
characteristic.


                                       Revista Colombiana de Estadística 39 (2016) 205–227

210                                                      Marti Font, Xavier Puig & Josep Ginebra


    The cluster analysis proposed next, based on carefully modeling the data prob-
abilistically using mixtures of multinomial models, avoids the continuity assump-
tion, and it naturally weights texts according to text size. Furthermore, by as-
suming the observations in each cluster to be multinomially distributed, one also
naturally takes into account the dependence between counts of categories from the
same characteristic.


3. Description of the Multinomial Cluster Model
   The i-th row of the r-th table is assumed to be multinomially distributed,
                                                                  Pk(r) r
                                 r
Mult(Nir , θir ), where θir = (θi1            r
                                   , . . . , θik(r) ) is such that j=1 θij             r
                                                                           = 1, where θij is
the probability of the j-th category for the i-th row and the r-th characteristic,
             Pk(r) r
and Nir = j=1 yij      . If all the chapters of the book or acts in the plays shared
the same style, one might expect the distribution of all the n rows for any given
characteristic to remain the same, in which case they could all be modeled as a
random sample of a single Mult(Nir , θr ) distribution.
   Instead, if the style in the n chapters or acts was not homogeneous, but these
chapters grouped themselves in S different styles, maybe because they had been
written by S different authors, then the n rows of the r-th table, y r = (y1r , . . . , ynr ),
could be considered to be conditionally independent and modeled through a finite
mixture of S multinomial distributions. They would have the probability density
function (pdf):
                                                         S
                                                       n X
                                                       Y
                    p(y r | ω, θ1r , . . . , θSr ) =             ωs Mult(Nir , θsr ),        (1)
                                                       i=1 s=1

where θsr = (θs1r            r
                  , . . . , θsk(r) ) which determines the distribution of the rows in the
s-th cluster of the r-th table, and where ω = (ω1 , . . . , ωS ) is a set of weights, with
                     PS
0 ≤ ωs ≤ 1 and s=1 ωs = 1, determining the proportion of rows (chapters or
acts) belonging to each cluster.
    To be able to allocate rows into clusters, which is an essential feature in cluster
analysis, it is necessary to introduces a vector of unobserved (latent) categorical
variables ζ = (ζ1 , . . . , ζn ), where ζi takes values in {1, . . . , S}, and it is such that
ζi = s whenever the i-th row belongs to the s-th cluster. Here, the ζi are assumed
to be conditionally independent, and hence:
                                                  n
                                                  Y
                         p(y r , ζ | ω, θr ) =           ωζi Mult(Nir , θζri ),              (2)
                                                  i=1

where θr = (θ1r , . . . , θSr ) is the set of multinomial probabilities for the r-th table.
   The latent variable ζ assigning chapters or acts into clusters does not depend
on r, and hence, it takes a common value for all the stylometric characteristics
considered. That is, the i-th rows in all the tables are always allocated into the
same cluster. Since the posterior distribution of ζi , π(ζi | y) is the posterior


                                             Revista Colombiana de Estadística 39 (2016) 205–227

Bayesian Analysis of the Heterogeneity of Literary Style                                       211

probability that the i-th row belongs to each cluster, we assign the i-th row to
the mode of that distribution. Conditional on θ = (θ1 , . . . , θR ) and on ζ, the
distribution of the different tables are considered to be independent.
    In Bayesian statistics, one needs to choose a distribution for the parameters of
the model that captures what one knows about them before observing the data.
This is denoted as the prior distribution. Here, that prior distribution will assume
that all vectors of probabilities across clusters and tables, θsr for s = 1, . . . , S
and r = 1, . . . , R, are independent, and that the θsr are distributed according
to a Dirichlet(ars1 , . . . , arsk(r) ) distribution. The weights ω determine the relative
sizes of the clusters that are assumed to be Dirichlet(b1 , . . . , bS ) distributed, and
independent of (θ1 , . . . , θS ).
   Depending on the values chosen for (ars1 , . . . , arsk(r) ), the prior distribution of
 r
θs will be more or less informative. In particular, the expected value of θsr will
                              Pk(r)
be (ars1 , . . . , arsk(r) )/( j=1 arsj ), and one can choose the arsj to reflect the fact that
some categories in a table might be known to have larger probabilities than others.
                 Pk(r)                                  r
Also, the larger j=1 arsj the smaller the variances of θsj and the more informative
                                   r
the prior distribution chosen for θs .
    The R = 1 and S = 2 special case of the model proposed here is the one used
in Giron et al. (2005), and the R = 1 and any S case is used in Puig & Ginebra
(2014). In our examples all the (ars1 , . . . , arsk(r) ) and (b1 , . . . , bS ) are set to be equal
to (1, . . . , 1), which is equivalent to assuming a uniform distribution on the simplex.
Given that the total number of words in the texts will be a lot larger than the
number of categories, k(r), the influence of the uniform prior on the conclusions
will be a lot weaker than the influence of the data through the likelihood. Choosing
a prior with a value for (ars1 , . . . , arsk(r) ) different to (1, . . . , 1), but with a similar
             Pk(r)
value of j=1 arsj , will not change the conclusions reached.
    Bayesian statistics combines the distribution chosen for the parameters before
obtaining the data (the prior distribution) with the data, to compute an updated
distribution that incorporates the information contributed by the data. In our case,
that updated posterior distribution is too complicated to be computed analytically.
Instead, one can update the model and simulate from it with WinBugs (see Lunn,
Jackson, Best, Thomas & Spiegelhalter 2013). The convergence of the chains has
been assessed through the visual inspection of the sample traces and the monitoring
of diagnostic measures. For each model, four chains with different initial values
have been run until all of their ergodic means converged to the same values.



4. The choice of the Number of Clusters
    A difficulty for the heuristic clustering algorithms is that they often lack a
statistically grounded method to determine the number of clusters. Instead, under
model based clustering the choice of the number of clusters, S, coincides with the
choice of model.


                                           Revista Colombiana de Estadística 39 (2016) 205–227

212                                          Marti Font, Xavier Puig & Josep Ginebra


   The safest way to build a model is through the iterative use of model checking
tools that help discover aspects of reality not adequately captured by the models,
and also suggest ways of improving them. Here this will be done through posterior
predictive checks.
    To help support the model choice, and, hence, the choice of the number of
clusters, one can also resort to formal model selection methods that are based on
the computation of the posterior probability that each one of the models considered
is the one generating the data. Here we will be able to take advantage of the fact
that under our finite mixtures of multinomial models setting there is a closed form
expression for these model posterior probabilities, and, therefore, one does not
have to resort to heuristic model selection criteria instead.
   Cluster analysis is useful only when the answer contains a relatively small
number of clusters, and, hence, it will typically be better to resolve this issue with
an approximate model that has a small number of clusters and explains a large
portion of the variability than with a model that is “true” and captures all the
variability but requires a large number of clusters.


4.1. Choice of s Through Model-Checking
   Bayesian models can be assessed and chosen based on whether it is plausible
that they are able to simulate data like the one observed in reality. Following the
example of Gelman, Carlin, Stern & Rubin (2004), we will graphically compare
the set of R observed tables, with analogous sets of tables simulated from the
posterior predictive distribution of the models.
    To compare the table with the word length data to the corresponding tables
with the data simulated from the predictive distributions of the model, these tables
are summarized by the proportion of words of L letters that there are in each
chapter or act for L = 1, . . . , 9 and for L > 9. We also summarize these tables
using average word length, the ratio between the number of words with more than
5 and of less than 6 letters, and by the first correspondence analysis components
in each table. To compare the table that has the observed word counts with
the corresponding simulated tables, they are summarized through the frequency
of the appearance of each one of these words separately, and through the first
correspondence analysis components in each table.
    A sample of these predictive comparisons will be presented in the first case
study. We do not report on the predictive checks for the other example for the
sake of brevity. For more examples of posterior predictive checks used to assess
Bayesian models in the context of the analysis of literary style, see Font, Puig &
Ginebra (2013), and for similar examples in the context of choosing the number
of clusters, see Puig & Ginebra (2014a, b).


4.2. Choice of s Through Model Selection
  The formal way to select a model is through the posterior probability of each
model, P (MS | y), which is the probability that the S-cluster model, MS , is the


                                     Revista Colombiana de Estadística 39 (2016) 205–227

Bayesian Analysis of the Heterogeneity of Literary Style                                  213

one generating the data, and will be assessed after the data has been observed. It
can be computed through:

                                       P (MS )P (y | MS )
                         P (MS | y) = PST                     ,                           (3)
                                       s=1 P (Ms )P (y | Ms )

where P (MS ) is the prior probability assigned to MS , (i.e., the probability that
this model is correct, assessed before the data is available), whereP (y | MS ) is
the marginal likelihood of MS , and where ST is the largest number of clusters
that one is willing to consider. If all models were equally likely a priori, the larger
P (y | MS ), the more attractive the MS would be. However there is a big debate on
how prior probabilities on model space should be chosen, due to the large difference
in complexity between models (see, e.g., Casella, Moreno & Giron 2014).
    Most often, computing P (y | MS ) exactly is too complicated, and its logarithm
is approximated through the BIC, as in Fraley & Raftery (2002). Alternatively, it
its possible to estimate P (y | MS ) through simulations used to update the model,
as in Gelfand & Dey (1994).
    However, in our multinomial mixture setting, there is a closed form expression
for P (y | MS ) that allows us to compute exactly these marginal likelihoods. In
this way, it is not necessary to use BIC or MCMC approximations. In this paper,
we will compute the marginal likelihoods of the MS model after conditioning on an
estimate of the latent allocation parameter, ζ, which leads to computing posterior
probabilities of the models conditional on these ζ̂ through (3.1). The ζ will be
estimated by using its marginal posterior mode.
   It can be proved that the marginal likelihood under the single cluster model,
M1 , is:
                 R       Qn            Qk(r) Pn    r                    n
                             r
                        i=1 Ni !        j=1 (     yij )!
                                          Pn i=1r
                 Y                                                     X
   p(y | M1 ) =     Qk(r) Qn                             Dir-Mult(yr ;     Nir , ar ),    (4)
                                 r       ( i=1 Ni )!
                r=1  j=1   i=1 yij !                                   i=1
                                                                          Pn        r
Pn yrr is the vector of aggregated counts of the r-th table, yr = ( i=1 yi1 , . . . ,
where
   i=1 yik ), and where Dir-Mult(x; N, a) denotes the pdf of a Dirichlet-multinomial
distribution with parameters N and a = (a1 , . . . , ak ) evaluated at x = (x1 , . . . , xk ),
                                                 Pk           k
                                         N !Γ(    j=1 aj )
                                                              Y Γ(xj + aj )
                Dir-Mult(x; N, a) =              Pk                               .       (5)
                                        Γ(N +         j=1 aj ) j=1
                                                                     xj !Γ(aj )

In general, the marginal likelihood under the single table S-cluster model, MS ,
becomes:
                                                 Qk(r) Pn       r
                                                                             
                       R     Qn      r        S                 yij I[ζ̂i =s] !
                      Y            N
                                i=1 i  !     Y    j=1       i=1
         p(y | MS ) =     Qk(r) Qn                 P                           ×
                                         r              n     r
                      r=1   j=1    i=1 yij ! s=1        i=1 Ni I[ζ̂i =s] !           (6)
                                                            n
                                                            X
                                      Dir-Mult(yr[ζ̂i =s] ;   Nir I[ζ̂i =s] , ars ),
                                                                 i=1



                                        Revista Colombiana de Estadística 39 (2016) 205–227

214                                          Marti Font, Xavier Puig & Josep Ginebra


where I[ζ̂i =s] denotes the indicator function that is 1 when the i-th observation
                                                                                  [ζ̂ =s]
is estimated to belong to the s-th cluster and it is 0 otherwise, and where yr i
denotes the vector of aggregated counts of all the observations estimated to belong
                   [ζ̂ =s]    Pn    r
                                                          Pn    r
to the s-cluster, yr i     = ( i=1 yi1 I[ζ̂i =s] , . . . , i=1 yik I[ζ̂i =s] ).
    In the case studies that follow, these p(y | MS ) will be used to assess the S-
cluster models when S = 1, 2, 3, 4 to help choose the number of clusters. It should
be kept in mind that the goal is to explain a large portion of the variability with
a small number of clusters. A model that explains all that variability should not
be found at the cost of using a lot of clusters.
    It is important to note that adopting the formal Bayesian approach to model
choice presented here does not help identify where models fail, and when they fail.
Hence, computing the posterior probabilities of all the models under consideration
in indicated here, does not relieve us of having to check models on the side: as is
described in Section 4.1.



5. CaseStudy 1: Shakespeare’s Drama
    William Shakespeare (1564-1616) is regarded by many to be the greatest writer
of English literature. Very little is known about his personal life, which has fueled a
debate around the authorship of plays and poems that are attributed to him. Even
though only a minority of the experts question his authorship, some claim that the
true author of some or all of the works attributed to him could be Francis Bacon,
Cristopher Marlowe, Ben Johnson, Sir Walter Raleigh or Edward de Vere. This
debate has been on going for more than 150 years, and far too many people have
contributed to it for it to be adequately summarized here. For recent overviews
of the debate see, for example, Hope (1994, 2010), Edmondson & Wells (2013) or
Shahan & Waugh (2013).
    Statistical analysis of the literary style in Shakespeare’s drama also started a
long time ago. Mendenhall (1901) is one of the earliest examples of the use of
statistics to compare the style of Shakespeare’s plays with the style of some of
his contemporaries, such as Marlowe and Bacon. He found that the word length
distribution in Shakespeare’s plays was extremely close to of Marlowe plays. The
list of contributions to the quantitative analysis of the style in texts linked to
Shakespeare is too long to be adequately described here.
    The type of statistical analysis carried out next is different to the statistical
analysis that has carried out so far on Shakespeare’s drama in two main ways.
The first difference arises from the fact that here we are trying to identify het-
erogeneities in Shakespeare’s drama, irrespective of whether they are linked to
authorship differences or not, while the literature on Shakespeare’s drama has
understandably focused mainly on authorship attribution issues. The second dif-
ference with other published statistical analysis of Shakespeare’s drama, is that
they rely on the use of training texts of undisputed authorship to help determine
the authorship of disputed texts, we, however do not.


                                     Revista Colombiana de Estadística 39 (2016) 205–227

Bayesian Analysis of the Heterogeneity of Literary Style                             215

    To explore the heterogeneity of style in Shakespeare’s drama, here a cluster
analysis is carried out on data we collected on the 35 plays gathered in the first
printing of the first folio edition of Shakespeare’s plays that were published posthu-
mously in 1623. That edition included fourteen comedies, ten histories, and eleven
tragedies, and it is the only reliable version for about twenty of these plays. Com-
mon wisdom supports the idea that some of the plays, especially the early histories,
might have been revised by other writers. Troilus and Cressida did not appear in
the first printing of that edition and Pericles and the two noble kinsmen did not
appear in any of its printings. There have not been included in this study even
though they are also attributed to Shakespeare.
    In the analysis, plays are broken down into five acts each, and, hence, a total of
175 textual units are considered. The goal of the analysis is to check whether acts
naturally cluster themselves together into more than one cluster when we takes,
into account word length and the frequency of the twenty most frequent function
words in them. Hence, data will consist of a 175 × 10 table with word length
counts, and of a 175 × 20 table with the twenty most frequent word counts.
   To choose the number of clusters, we need to assess whether the models involved
capture the relevant features in the data. Figure 1, as example of this exercise,
compares the observed proportion of words with one, two, three, nine and of
more than nine letters in these 175 acts, the average word length, the ratio of
the number of long words, and the short words with the ones corresponding to a
sample simulated from the posterior predictive distribution under the one–, the
two–, and the three-cluster models. The data plots in the left column of Figure
1 correspond to the actual plays by Shakespeare, while the data plots on the
remaining three columns of that figure correspond to data replicates obtained
from the three simplest multinomial mixture models.
    Figure 2 compares the frequency of the, and, I, you, it, your and his that
are observed in Shakespeare’s plays, in the left column with the corresponding
frequencies in a sample simulated from the same multinomial mixture models in the
remaining three columns. Figures 1 and 2 also compare the first correspondence
analysis component by summarizing the two tables of data considered here with
the components summarizing analogous tables obtained by simulating from these
models.
    Note, for example, that the average word length tends to be smaller and the
proportion of one and three lettered words tends to be larger for comedies than
for histories or tragedies, while, for example, in there simple of plays the use of
the words I and you tends to be more frequent.
    We now have to check whether either one of the one–, two– or three-cluster
models considered in Section 3 capture the patterns in Figures 1 and 2 adequately
or not. Figures 1 and 2, and many other posterior predictive checks additionally
made are, not reported here. However they all indicate that these finite mixtures
of multinomial models are able to reproduce most of the variability in the data.
To choose among the one–, the two– and the three-cluster models, several of the
statistics in Figures 1 and 2 indicate that at least three clusters are needed to
capture the variation in the levels of these statistics.


                                      Revista Colombiana de Estadística 39 (2016) 205–227

216                                                                           Marti Font, Xavier Puig & Josep Ginebra




                                Comedy History Tragedy Comedy History Tragedy Comedy History Tragedy Comedy History Tragedy



          0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08
      L=1
          0.20
      L=2
          0.16
          0.12
          0.26
      L=3
          0.22
          0.18
          0.040
      L=9
          0.025
          0.05 0.010
      L=10+
          0.03
          0.01
          4.5
          4.3
      L
          4.1
          3.9
          4.5
      lg/st
          3.5
          2.5
          2
          1
      1st C
          0
          −2




                                         act                    act                    act                     act

Figure 1: The left column shows, proportion whit words of one, two, three, nine and
          more than nine letters, the average word –lengths, the ratio between the
          number of long and of short words in the acts of the plays in Shakespeare’s
          drama, and the first correspondence analysis component of the table of word
          lengths. Next to each of these plots, posterior predictive replicates are shown
          under the one–, two– and three-cluster models.




                                                                      Revista Colombiana de Estadística 39 (2016) 205–227

Bayesian Analysis of the Heterogeneity of Literary Style                                                        217




                  Comedy History Tragedy Comedy History Tragedy Comedy History Tragedy Comedy History Tragedy


          0.045
          0.030
      the
          0.015
          0.050
      and
          0.035
          0.020
          0.05
          0.03
      I
          0.01
          0.020
      you
          0.005
          0.015
      it
          0.005
          0.010
      your
          0.000
          0.020
      his
          0.010
          0.000
          2
          1
      1st C
          0
          −2




                           act                    act                    act                     act

Figure 2: The left column shows, the frequency the, and, I, you, it, your and his in the
          as well the plays in the first folio edition of Shakespeare, first correspondence
          analysis component of the table with the twenty most frequent word counts.
          Next to each of these plots, posterior predictive replicates under the one-,
          two- and three-cluster models.




                                                        Revista Colombiana de Estadística 39 (2016) 205–227

218                                                                                            Marti Font, Xavier Puig & Josep Ginebra


    Here the natural logarithm of P (y | MS ) under the one–, two–, three– and
four-cluster models are equal to −25488.4, −23608.0, −22988.9 and −22677.3,
respectively. If we compute the posterior probabilities that each one of these four
cluster models is the correct one through (3), we have to choose the four-cluster
model. However, if we penalizes models with more clusters by assigning them
much smaller prior probabilities, as recommended by Casella et al. (2014), we will
settle for the two– or three– cluster models. In fact, Figures 1 and 2 indicate that
the two- and the three-cluster models already account for most of the variability
in the data.
   In order to compare the result of the cluster analysis, of the information com-
bining both word length and the use of word counts, with the results of the cluster
analysis using only word counts, both analysis are carried out.
                                                                                  Word count                   Word length & count
                                                                        I    II      III       IV   V      I     II   III       IV   V


                            The Tempest

                   The two Gentlemen of Verona

                    The Merry Wiues of Windsor

                        Measvre, for Measure
                                                            Comedies




                       The Comedie of Errors

                      Much adoe about Nothing

                         Loues Labours lost

                    A Midsommer Nights Dreame

                       The Merchant of Venice

                             As you like it

                      The Taming of the Shrew

                       Alls well, that ends well

                    Twelfe Night, or what you will

                          The Winters Tale

                   The life and death of King John

            The life and death of King Richard the Second

                  The First Part of Henry the Fourth
                                                            Histories




                The Second Part of Henry the Fourth

                      The Life of Hernry de Fift

                   The first Part of Henry the Sixt

                 The second Part of Henry the Sixt

                   The third Part of Henry the Sixt

                  The Tragedie of Richard the Third

                  ... the Life of King Henry the Eight

                     The Tragedy of Coriolanus

                  The Tragedie of Titus Andronicus

                 The Tragedie of Romeo and Juliet

                     The Life of Timon of Athens
                                                            Tragedies




                   The Tragedie of Julius Caesar

                      The Tragedie of Macbeth

                       The Tragedie of Hamlet

                      The Tragedie of King Lear

            The Tragedie of Othello, the Moore of Venice

              The Tragedie of Anthonie, and Cleopatra

                     The Tragedie of Cymbeline

                                                                                      1    2                           1    2




Figure 3: Classification of each one of the five acts of each of the plays in Shakespeare’s
          first folio edition under the two-cluster model, first using only word counts
          and second using both word length as well as word counts.


    Figure 3 allocates acts into either one of two clusters using the posterior prob-
abilities for ζi and uses the two-cluster model. It indicates that the two-cluster
analysis classifies acts mostly by genre. In this analysis, most of the acts in come-
dies fall into Cluster 1, most of the acts in histories fall into Cluster 2, while the
acts in tragedies are more or less evenly split across both clusters. An exception

                                                                            Revista Colombiana de Estadística 39 (2016) 205–227

Bayesian Analysis of the Heterogeneity of Literary Style                                                                              219

to that rule is that most of the acts in “A Midsommer Nights Dream” are classified
under history instead of a comedy. Note that also that all the acts Titus Andron-
icus and Machbeth tragedies are classified as histories, while the acts of all other
tragedies are split between both clusters.
    When we compare the result of the analysis that combine word length and
word counts with the analysis based only on word counts, we found that only a
small number of acts change allocation. The results of both analyses are different
and yet, they are similar enough to be able to justify the combination of both
characteristics into a single analysis.
   Figure 4 allocates acts using clusters under the three-cluster model, again first
based only on word counts and second, based on both word counts as well as word
lengths. It also appears that the classification of acts into clusters is mostly made
by genre, with Cluster 1 being mostly formed by acts in tragedies, Cluster 2 mostly
by acts in comedies, and Cluster 3 mostly by acts in histories.
                                                                                  Word count                Word length & count
                                                                        I    II      III       IV   V   I     II   III       IV   V


                            The Tempest

                   The two Gentlemen of Verona

                    The Merry Wiues of Windsor

                        Measvre, for Measure
                                                            Comedies




                       The Comedie of Errors

                      Much adoe about Nothing

                         Loues Labours lost

                    A Midsommer Nights Dreame

                       The Merchant of Venice

                             As you like it

                      The Taming of the Shrew

                       Alls well, that ends well

                    Twelfe Night, or what you will

                          The Winters Tale

                   The life and death of King John

            The life and death of King Richard the Second

                  The First Part of Henry the Fourth
                                                            Histories




                The Second Part of Henry the Fourth

                      The Life of Hernry de Fift

                   The first Part of Henry the Sixt

                 The second Part of Henry the Sixt

                   The third Part of Henry the Sixt

                  The Tragedie of Richard the Third

                  ... the Life of King Henry the Eight

                     The Tragedy of Coriolanus

                  The Tragedie of Titus Andronicus

                 The Tragedie of Romeo and Juliet

                     The Life of Timon of Athens
                                                            Tragedies




                   The Tragedie of Julius Caesar

                      The Tragedie of Macbeth

                       The Tragedie of Hamlet

                      The Tragedie of King Lear

            The Tragedie of Othello, the Moore of Venice

              The Tragedie of Anthonie, and Cleopatra

                     The Tragedie of Cymbeline

                                                                                      1    3                        1    3
                                                                                      2                             2



Figure 4: Classification of each one of the five acts of each of the plays in Shakespeare’s
          first folio edition under the three-cluster model, first using only word counts
          and second using both word length as well as word counts.

    To help interpret the results, Figure 5 presents the first correspondence anal-
ysis components, using the method proposed by Greenacre (2007), for the word
counts table in the acts of Shakespeare’s drama. Acts are stratified first across

                                                                            Revista Colombiana de Estadística 39 (2016) 205–227

220                                                         Marti Font, Xavier Puig & Josep Ginebra


genre, which helps emphasize that the heterogeneity of style found in Shakespeare’s
drama mostly relates to genre. Acts in Figure 5 are also stratified according to
their three-cluster classification, which shows how clusters mostly group observa-
tions close together in the space of the first correspondence analysis components,
and which helps appreciate what changes arise from combining word length and
word counts in the analysis instead of just using word counts.

              histories | tragedies | comedies    3 cluster by count       3 cluster by length & count
      2nd C




                           1st C                        1st C                         1st C

Figure 5: First correspondence analysis components of the table of word counts in the
          Shakespeare’s dramas. There are stratified according to genre, and according
          to the cluster to which the act belongs when using only word counts, and
          when using both word length as well as word counts.


    To help understand what distinguishes clusters different style, Figure 6 presents
a sample of the posterior distribution of the multinomial probabilities for word
length counts and for the most frequent words under the three-cluster model.
Cluster 2, mostly formed by comedies, has the largest proportion of words with
one, two or three letters and the smallest proportion of words with five, six, seven,
eight, nine or more than nine letters. Cluster 2 also has the largest frequencies of
I, a, you, it, and of me, and the smallest frequencies of and and of his. Clusters 1
and 3 seem to be much more similar in terms of most of the categories considered,
with Cluster 3 being especially recognized for having smaller frequencies of I, you,
it and your, and larger frequencies of the, of and with than the other two clusters.



6. Case study 2: Tirant lo Blanc
    Tirant lo Blanc is a chivalry book written in catalan and hailed as be “the
best book of its kind in the world” by Miguel de Cervantes. The main body of
the book was written between 1460 and 1464, but it was not printed until 1490,
and there has been a long lasting debate around its authorship, originating from
conflicting information given in its first edition. In the beginning of the book it
is stated that “So that no one else can be blamed if any faults are found in this
work, I, Joanot Martorell, take sole responsibility for it,” at the end of the book it
is stated that “Because of his death, Sir Joanot Martorell could only finish writing
three parts of it. The fourth part, which is the end of the book, was written by
the illustrious knight Sir Martí Joan de Galba.” Over the years, experts have split
between the ones favoring the single authorship hypotheses, and the ones backing
the hypotheses of a change of author somewhere between chapters 350 and 400.


                                                 Revista Colombiana de Estadística 39 (2016) 205–227

Bayesian Analysis of the Heterogeneity of Literary Style                                                                                    221




                    0.20
                    0.10
                    0.05
                    0.02
                    0.10
                    0.06
                    0.04
                    0.02     L1         L2        L3        L4          L5        L6         L7           L8          L9          L+10



                           the
                                  and
                                        I
                                            to
                                                 of
                                                      a




                                                                     that
                                                                            in
                                                                                 is
                                                                                      not
                                                                                            it


                                                                                                       with
                                                                                                              me


                                                                                                                          his
                                                                                                                                this
                                                                                                                                       be
                                                                my
                                                          you




                                                                                                                   your
                                                                                                 for
Figure 6: Box-plots of a sample of the probabilities for word length, (θ1wl , θ2wl , θ3wl ), and
          for word counts, (θ1mf , θ2mf , θ3mf ), in the three clusters of plays in the first
          folio edition Shakespeare’s, all are in a logarithmic scale.




   It is generally accepted that the main (and maybe single) author died in 1465,
and neither he nor the candidate who was to finish to book left any other texts
comparable to this one. An analysis of the diversity of the vocabulary in Riba
& Ginebra (2006) found that it is less diverse after chapter 383. Giron et al.
(2005) and Riba & Ginebra (2005) carried out a change point and a two-cluster
analysis, separately, first for word length and second for the most frequent words.
In both cases a stylistic boundary is detected between chapters 371 and 382. This
agreement triggered our interest in combining the information in word length with
the information in word counts in a single combined analysis.

   These papers formally tested for the existence of more than one cluster under
each characteristic, by computing the probabilities in (3) under each one of the two
tables separately. It was consequently decided that there were two clusters, but it
was also conjectured that finite mixtures of Dirichlet-multinomials might be better
able to capture the variability in the data than finite mixtures of multinomials.

   We carry out a cluster analysis simultaneously based on both the 425 × 10
table of word length counts as well as on the 425 × 12 table with the count of
the twelve words chosen in Giron et al. (2005) based on the discrimination power
between the beginning of the book and its ending. Similarity to that paper, only
chapters with more than 200 words are considered. Posterior predictive model
checks carried out here similar to the ones in Figures 1 and 2 for Shakespeare’s
plays indicate that it is also possible to rely on a finite mixture of sets of purely


                                                           Revista Colombiana de Estadística 39 (2016) 205–227

222                                                                        Marti Font, Xavier Puig & Josep Ginebra


multinomial models. Hence, the conjecture that one might need mixtures of sets
from Dirichlet-multinomial models is not called for.
    Figure 7 presents the posterior probability that the i-th row (chapter) belongs
to Cluster 1, ζi = 1, which is what one needs to classify the chapters of Tirant
lo Blanc into either one of the two clusters. Cluster 1 mostly includes chapters
previous to chapters 375-385, while Cluster 2 mostly includes chapters that come
after that boundary; however, there are a fair amount of chapters misclassified by
that boundary. This partition of chapters into clusters is similar to the partitions
obtained through the analysis carried out in Giron et al. (2005) which considered
the two characteristics separately.
              1.0
              0.8
              0.6
              0.4
              0.2
              0.0


                    1

                        25

                             50

                                  75

                                       100

                                             125

                                                   150

                                                         175

                                                               200

                                                                     225

                                                                           250

                                                                                 275

                                                                                       300

                                                                                             325

                                                                                                   350

                                                                                                         375

                                                                                                               400

                                                                                                                     425

                                                                                                                           450

                                                                                                                                 475
                                                                                                                                 487
                                                                      Chapter

      Figure 7: Probability that chapters in Tirant lo Blanc belong to Cluster 1.


    The distribution of the multinomial probabilities under the two-cluster models
presented in Figure 8 indicate that two and three lettered words are more abundant
in Cluster 1, while one, six, seven, eight, nine and more than nine lettered words
are more abundant in Cluster 2. That figure also indicates that the words que, no,
com, és, jo, si and dix are significantly more abundant in Cluster 1, mostly in the
first part of the book, while e, de, la, l’ and molt are more abundant in Cluster 2,
mostly at the end of the book.
    The results presented in this case study are based on the analysis of the counts
of twelve words that were selected by Giron et al. (2005). They first under book
the analysis with the set of twenty most frequent function words and realized that
the main difference in style was between the first four fifths of the book and the
last one fifth. They then repeated the analysis with the subset of twelve most
discriminating words used here. This sequential approach that starts with about
twenty words and then repeats the analysis with the most discriminating words
among them helps sharpen the classification power of the method.
    Finally, note that different from the previous case study, in this example texts
(chapters) are ordered sequentially, and that order is not taken into consideration
in the cluster analysis model used here. Puig, Font & Ginebra (2015) propose
an alternative analysis that treats the two stylometric variables separately, but
incorporates the fact that chapters close together are more likely to belong to the
same author than chapters that are far apart. In this case, the results of the
analysis are similar.


                                                         Revista Colombiana de Estadística 39 (2016) 205–227

Bayesian Analysis of the Heterogeneity of Literary Style                                                  223




                   0.20
                   0.10
                   0.05
                          L1    L2        L3         L4    L5    L6    L7          L8        L9    L+10
                   0.20
                   0.10
                   0.05
                   0.02
                   0.01



                          e

                               de

                                     la

                                               que

                                                      no

                                                           l

                                                                com

                                                                      és

                                                                            molt

                                                                                        jo

                                                                                              si

                                                                                                    dix
Figure 8: Box-plots of a sample of the multinomial probabilities for word length,
          (θ1wl , θ2wl ), and for word counts, (θ1mf , θ2mf ), for the two clusters in Tirant
          lo Blanc, all in a logarithmic scale.



7. Final Comments
   The paper deals with the analysis of the heterogeneity in literary style, when
the researcher does not have a list of candidate authors and of training texts of
known authorship to help build the list of best discriminating words needed to
determine the authorship of disputed texts. Without them, there is no statistical
ground to determine whether the heterogeneities detected are due to authorship,
chronology, genre, topic or otherwise.
    In the first case study, the results presented are based on twenty of the most
frequent words. We also repeated the analysis using only the subset of these words
that better according to Figure 6 discriminate between clusters. We consider
this sequential approach, starting with about twenty words and then repeating
the analysis with the most discriminating words among them, to be very useful.
Using far more than twenty words is usually problematic, because included in the
analysis; will be many words that do not distinguish between styles and, therefore,
hamper the classification power of the algorithm.
    When using word length and word counts, our predictive checks indicate that
finite mixtures of multinomial models capture most of the variability in the data:
this settles the issue raised in Giron et al. (2005). In this setting, one does not need
to use hierarchical models, such as the Dirichlet-multinomial models finite mixtures
that are used in Puig & Ginebra (2014) to account for any extra variability in the
data.

                                                     Revista Colombiana de Estadística 39 (2016) 205–227

224                                         Marti Font, Xavier Puig & Josep Ginebra


    Finally, note that one could still use more sophisticated models that use Dirich-
let process mixtures to embed all the S-cluster models into a single model where
s becomes a parameter to be estimated. Such an approach would be a lot more
demanding computationally than the one taken here, and it would not be easy to
implement with WinBugs.


Acknowledgements
    This work was funded in part by Grant No. MTM2013-43992-R of the Minis-
terio de Ciencia e Inovación of Spain.
                                                              
                  Received: April 2015 — Accepted: January 2016


References
Banfield J D, Raftery A E. Model based gaussian and non-gaussian clustering.(1993). Biometrics.
Binongo J N G. Joaquin’s Joaquinesquerie Joaquinesqueri’s Joaquin: a statistical expression of a Filipino Writer’s style.(1994). Literary and Linguistic Computing.
Brinegar C S. Mark twain and the quintus curtius snodgrass letters: A statistical test of authorship.(1963). Journal of the American Statistical Association.
Bruno A M. Toward a Quantitative Methodology for Stylistic Analysis of Narrative Style.(1974). University of California Press.Berkeley.
Casella G, Moreno E, Giron J. Cluster analysis model selection and prior distributions on models.(2014). Bayesian Analysis.
Edmondson P, Wells S. Shakespeare Beyond Doubt: Evidence Argument Controversy.(2013). Cambridge University Press.
Fernandez C, Green P J. Modelling spatially correlated data via mixtures: a bayesian approach.(2002). Journal of the Royal Statistical Society.
Font M, Puig X, Ginebra J. A Bayesian analysis of frequency count data.(2013). Journal of Statistical Computation and Simulation.
Fraley C, Raftery A E. Model-based clustering discriminant analy sis and density estimation.(2002). Journal of the American Statistical Association.
Gelfand A E, Dey D K. Bayesian model choice: Asymptotics and exact calculations.(1994). Journal of the Royal Statistical Society.
Gelman A, Carlin J C, Stern H, Rubin D B. Bayesian Data Analysis.(2004). Chapman and Hall.
Giron J, Ginebra J, Riba A. Bayesian analysis of a multinomial sequence and homogeneity of literary style.(2005). The American Statistician.
Gnanadesikan R. Methods of Statistical Data Analysis of Multivariate Observations.(1997). Wiley.
Gordon A D. Classification.(1999). Chapman and Hall.
Greenacre M. Clustering the rows and columns of a contingency table.(1988). Journal of Classification.
Greenacre M. Correspondence Analysis in Practice.(2007). Chapman and Hall.
Hilton M L, Holmes D I. An assessment of cumulative control charts for authorship-attribution.(1993). Literary and Linguistic Computing.
Holmes D I. The analysis of literary style a review.(1985). Journal of the Royal Statistical Society.
Holmes D I. A stylometric analysis of mormon scripture and related texts.(1992). Journal of the Royal Statistical Society.
Holmes D I. Authorship attribution.(1994). Computers and the Humanities.
Holmes D I. The evolution of stylometry in humanities scholarship.(1998). Literary and Linguistic Computing.
Holmes D I. Stylometry in Encyclopedia of Statistical Sciences.(1999). Wiley.
Hope J. The Authorship of Shakespeare’s Plays.(1994). Cambridge University Press.
Hope J. Shakespeare and Language: Reason Eloquence and Artifice in the Renaissance.(2010). The Arden Shakespeare.
Kaufman L, Rousseeuw P J. Finding Groups in Data.(1990). Wiley.
Lunn D J, Jackson C, Best N, Thomas A, Spiegelhalter D. The BUGS Book, A Practical Introduction to Bayesian Analysis.(2013). Chapman Hall.
Luyckx K. Scalability Issues in Authorship Attribution.(2010). University Press Antwerp.
Mendenhall T C. The characteristic curves of composition.(1887). Science.
Mendenhall T C. A mechanical solution of a literary problem.(1901). The Popular Science Monthly.
Miranda Garcia A, Calle Martin J. Function words in authorship attribution studies.(2007). Literary and Linguistic Computing.
Morton A Q. Literary Detection.(1978). Scribners.
Mosteller F, Wallace D L. Applied Bayesian and Classical Inference; the Case of The Federalist Papers.(1984). Springer-Verlag.
Murtagh F, Raftery A E. Fitting straight lines to point patterns.(1984). Pattern Recognition.
Oakes M P. Statistics for Corpus Linguistics.(1998). Edimburgh University Press.
Puig X, Font M, Ginebra J. Classification of literary style that takes order into consideration.(2015). Journal of Quantitative Linguistics.
Puig X, Font M, Ginebra J. A unified approach to authorship attribution and verification.(2016). To appear in The American Statistician.
Puig X, Ginebra J.A bayesian cluster analysis of election results.(2014). Journal of Applied Statistics.
Riba A, Ginebra J. Change-point estimation in a multinomial sequence and homogeneity of literary style.(2005). Journal of Applied Statistics.
Riba A, Ginebra J. Diversity of vocabulary and homogeneity of literary style.(2006). Journal of Applied Statistic.
Rybicki J, Eder M. Deeper Delta across genres and languages: do we really need the most frequent words?.(2011). Literary and Linguistic Computing.
Shahan J M, Waugh A. Shakespeare Beyond Doubt? Exposing and Industry in Denial.(2013). Llumina Press.
Smith M W A. Recent experience and new developments of methods for the determination of authorship.(1983). Association for Literary and Linguistic Computing Bulletin.
Stamatatatos E. A survey of modern authorship attribution methods.(2009). Journal of the American Society of Information Science and Technology.
Williams C B. Mendenhall’s studies of word-length distribution in the works of Shakespeare and Bacon.(1975). Biometrika.
Zhao Y, Zobel J. Effective and scalable authorship attribution using function words.(2005). Information Retrieval Technology.