Complete-Linkage Clustering Analysis of Surrogate Measures for Road Safety Assessment in Roundabouts. Análisis de conglomerados mediante vecinos más lejanos en medidas sustitutas para la evaluación de seguridad vial en glorietas
Universidad Nacional de Colombia, Bogotá, Colombia. 
Abstract
This paper presents the ﬁndings of a comparative road safety assessment between an existing two-lane roundabout and proposed basic turbo-roundabout, both designed for the same intersection, to determine which one is safer, based on traﬃc conﬂicts and surrogate safety measures. We performed microsimulation models in VISSIM to replicate the ﬁeld-observed traﬃc operation, and the SSAM to determinate six surrogate measures. We validated the consistency of values obtained by several statistical analyzes. The number of conﬂicts was 72% lower at the turbo-roundabout. Through a complete-linkage clustering analysis and Euclidean distances of the surrogate measures, we found that traﬃc conﬂicts at the turbo-roundabout tend to cluster in a group, whereas conﬂicts at the roundabout are scattered, suggesting better organization of traﬃc ﬂows at the turbo-roundabout. Three-dimensional graphical analysis of clusters and its centroids allowed verifying that surrogate measures point out a safer operation at the turbo-roundabout, even though it presented higher operating speeds. Reducing the dimensionality by principal components analysis, the cumulative variance for the ﬁrst two components (87.72%) allowed observing results on a two-dimensional graph and their clusters. To endorse conﬂicts classiﬁcation, resulting of clusters, we used discriminant analysis. Results validate the methodology and the safety beneﬁts of the turbo-roundabout.
Key words: Cluster analysis; Complete linkage; Discriminant analysis; Principal Component analysis; Traﬃc safety simulation.
Resumen
Este artículo presenta los hallazgos de una evaluación comparativa de seguridad vial entre una glorieta clásica existente y una turboglorieta propuesta, en la misma intersección, para determinar cuál es más segura, con base en conﬂictos de tráﬁco y medidas sustitutas. Elaboramos modelos en VISSIM para recrear la operación del tráﬁco observada en campo y SSAM para determinar seis medidas sustitutas. Validamos la consistencia de los resultados por varios análisis estadísticos. El número de conﬂictos fue 72% menor en la turboglorieta. Mediante un análisis de conglomerados de las medidas sustitutas, los conﬂictos en la turboglorieta tienden a agruparse en un clúster, mientras que en la glorieta éstos están dispersos, sugiriendo una mejor organización de los ﬂujos de tráﬁco en la turboglorieta. El análisis gráﬁco tridimensional de conglomerados y centroides permitió veriﬁcar que las medidas sustitutas indican una operación más segura en la turboglorieta, a pesar de presentar velocidades de aproximación más altas. Reduciendo la dimensionalidad, mediante análisis de componentes principales, la varianza acumulada de los dos primeros componentes (87.72%) permitió observar los resultados en dos dimensiones. Mediante análisis discriminante, respaldamos la clasiﬁcación de conﬂictos resultante de los clústeres. Los resultados validan la metodología y los beneﬁcios en seguridad de la turboglorieta. 
Palabras clave: Análisis de componentes principales; Análisis de conglomerados; Análisis discriminante; Simulación de la seguridad vial; Vecino más lejano.

1. Introduction
1.1. Problem Statement
   Historically, quantitative assessment of road safety has required crash
occurrences in order to formulate engineering countermeasures and to develop
predictive statistical models. With similar purposes, preventive and qualitative
methods, such as Road Safety Audits (RSA), have been developed based on
the perception of road safety; however, its subjectivity can be reﬂected in the
evaluation, as stated by Koorey et al. (2003), Meister and Koorey (2003) and
Caﬁso et al. (2013). Given this situation, under a preventive and quantitative
approach, diﬀerent traﬃc conﬂict techniques have been developed to overcome the
mentioned limitations up to some extent. According to Johnsson et al. (2018),
the main techniques are the Swedish traﬃc conﬂict technique (Hydén, 1987), The
Canadian conﬂict technique (Brown et al., 1984), The Dutch conﬂict technique
(Kraay et al., 2013), and the American conﬂict technique (Parker and Zegeer,
1989). Each technique has variables that allow determining the severity level of a

                    Revista Colombiana de Estadística - Applied Statistics 44 (2021) 91–121

Multivariate Safety Assessment of Roundabouts                                          93

conﬂict, known as surrogate safety measures. This paper uses the variables of the
American technique, which is explained below.
    In accordance with Gettman and Head (2003), safety of traﬃc facilities
is commonly assessed by tracking and analyzing police-reported motor vehicle
crashes over time. Given that the nature of the crashes is both infrequent and
random, this process is slow to reveal the need for remediation of either roadway
design or ﬂow-control strategy. This process is also not applicable to assess
new designs that have yet to be built, or to assess new ﬂow control strategies
before being employed on-site. As an alternative to solve above restraints,
microsimulation models are a useful tool. Therefore, using simulation of traﬃc
conﬂicts, it is possible to estimate their surrogate safety measures by means of the
Surrogate Safety Assessment Model, SSAM (Pu and Joshi, 2008).
    Literature review allows identifying that surrogates as Time to Collision
(TTC), Post-encroachment Time (PET), Initial Deceleration Rate (DR),
Maximum deceleration rate (MaxD) and Maximum speed (MaxS), have been
used in an univariate way, preferably, in accordance with Sayed and Zein (1999),
Archer and Kosonen (2000), McDowell et al. (1983), Archer (2005) and Gettman
et al. (2008), respectively. Given possible correlations between these variables, we
consider that univariate assessments are not enough to conclude about road safety.
Additionally, most relations between surrogates have not been explored yet (Tarko
et al., 2009). Accordingly, assessments based on multivariate analysis of surrogates
are needed to increase knowledge of traﬃc conﬂicts. Hence, this paper focuses on
the comparative safety assessment of two types of roundabouts by multivariate
methods.


1.2. Traﬃc Conﬂict and Surrogate Safety Measures
    A traﬃc conﬂict is an observable situation in which two or more road users
approach each other in space and time to such an extent that there is a risk of
collision if their movements remain unchanged (Bulla-Cruz and Lyons, 2020). This
situation derives physical variables known as surrogate safety measures, used for
determining the severity of the event. Figure 1 shows vehicular trajectories in a
traﬃc conﬂict and six safety performance measures, that SSAM can report, deﬁned
as follows:

  • Time to Collision minimum (TTCmin ): minimum time in seconds required
    for two vehicles to collide if speeds and directions not change. It is a measure
    continuous with time; that is, the calculation may be performed at any
    instant within the sequence time frame (Hayward, 1972).
  • Post-encroachment Time (PET): time in seconds between the ﬁrst road
    user leaving the ‘conﬂict zone’ and the second one arriving at it
    (Laureshyn et al., 2017).
  • Initial Deceleration Rate (DR): quantiﬁes the magnitude of the deceleration
    action of a driver the moment he or she begins an evasive braking maneuver,
    in m/s2 (Johnsson et al., 2018).

                   Revista Colombiana de Estadística - Applied Statistics 44 (2021) 91–121

94                                                         Lenin Bulla-Cruz, Liliana Lyons & Enrique Darghan


     • Maximum deceleration rate (MaxD): maximum deceleration of the through
       vehicle, in m/s2 (Gettman et al., 2008).
     • Maximum speed (MaxS): maximum of conﬂicting speeds of two vehicles
       involved in a conﬂict event, in m/s (Gettman and Head, 2003).
     • Diﬀerence in vehicle speeds (DeltaS): absolute value of diﬀerence in
       conﬂicting speeds of two conﬂicting vehicles, in m/s (Gettman and Head,
       2003).
        Distance




                                                      Conflicting
                                                      speed V1                    PET
                   Crossing vehicle V1


                                                                            TTC                     Projected arrival of V2 at
                                                                                                          conflict point




                                                                                                                      Conflict point
                                 MaxS and DeltaS
                                                                                        MaxD
                                                                                                    Real arrival of V2 at conflict
                                                                                                               point
                   Trajectory invasion of V1 starts                                                Encroachment ends avoiding the
                                                                            DR                                collision




                                                                                                     Conflicting
                                                                                                      speed V2
                   Through vehicle V2


                        Through vehicle begins braking


                                                                1   2   3         4            5                                 Time


Figure 1: Vehicular trajectories in a traﬃc conﬂict and safety performance measures.



1.3. Roundabouts versus Turbo-Roundabouts
    Fortuijn (2009) developed turbo-roundabouts as an attempt to deal with
disadvantages related to higher driving speeds allowed by concentric two-lane
roundabouts and the possibility of lane changing, which favor the occurrence of
crashes. In accordance with Vasconcelos et al. (2014), a turbo-roundabout is a
variation of conventional multilane roundabout in which spiral road markings and
raised lane dividers force drivers to follow speciﬁc paths to their destination. This
geometry eliminates weaving and cut-in conﬂicts by guiding drivers continuously
from entrance to exit. The turbo-roundabout eliminates lateral conﬂicts due to its
geometric conﬁguration, reducing the total number of theoretical conﬂicts points
from 16 at the two-lane roundabout to 10 at the turbo-roundabout. Figure 2
shows the location of conﬂict points at both types of roundabouts.

                                   Revista Colombiana de Estadística - Applied Statistics 44 (2021) 91–121

Multivariate Safety Assessment of Roundabouts                                                  95



    Concentric two-                                    Turbo-roundabout
    lane roundabout
    with two double-
       lane exits




    16 conflict points:
                                                       10 conflict points
    12 on entry                                        on entry
    2 weaving
    2 cut-in



                          Figure 2: Theoretical location of conﬂict points.




1.4. Background Research
   Road safety in roundabouts and turbo-roundabouts has previously been
assessed through a Road Safety Audit (Bulla-Cruz and Castro, 2011), ﬁnding
a 22% reduction in the overall risk in favor of turbo-roundabout. This audit
compared geometric designs of proposed intersections.
   Silva et al. (2014) found a reduction from 24 conﬂict points in a double-
lane roundabout to 14 points in a basic turbo-roundabout, indicating an overall
reduction in crash probability. Vasconcelos et al. (2014) used microsimulation
models in AIMSUN and SSAM to compare diﬀerent types of roundabouts, based
on the number of conﬂicts, ﬁnding that the turbo-roundabout is the best option.
Mauro et al. (2015) used a potential accident rate model for turbo-roundabouts,
ﬁnding that these intersections provide: [i] reductions on the number of total
potential accidents between 40% and 50%, and [ii] reductions on the number of
potential accidents with injuries between 20% and 30%.
   Hatami and Aghayan (2017) compared the traﬃc performance and eﬃciency of
three types of roundabouts (modern, turbo and elliptical roundabouts), based on
delay, capacity and geometrical features such as central island radius and diﬀerent
number of lanes. The authors also tested unsignalized and signalized controls in
saturated and unsaturated ﬂow conditions. They found that, in comparison with
the turbo-roundabouts, the modern and the elliptical roundabouts showed the
highest capacities with both unsignalized and signalized controls.
    Campisi et al. (2018) performed a microsimulation study on the changes of
the level of service and traﬃc safety outcomes based on surrogate safety measures,
when connecting a turbo-roundabout with a BRT line, using VISSIM and SSAM as
simulation tools, and TTCmin and PET as surrogate indicators. They investigated
six scenarios by varying directional traﬃc ﬂows and their vehicle composition for
evaluating the simulated safety outcomes.

                           Revista Colombiana de Estadística - Applied Statistics 44 (2021) 91–121

96                                Lenin Bulla-Cruz, Liliana Lyons & Enrique Darghan


    Khasawneh and Alsaleh (2018) studied the possibility of upgrading at-grade
roundabouts to turbo-roundabouts considering the Jordanian driving conditions,
and how such upgrade could aﬀect the selected performance measures: safety,
capacity, queue length, delay, and level of service. The authors selected and
analyzed three roundabouts using SIDRA software under oﬀ-peak and peak traﬃc
conditions to estimate capacity, queue length, delay, and level of service under
the existing design. Then they applied two diﬀerent designs for each roundabout,
using TORUS software, by changing some geometrical features, such as inner
radius and opening width. Finally, they analyzed the designs, using VISSIM
software, to assess the eﬀect of implementing a turbo-roundabout instead the
conventional roundabout. The ﬁndings show that the turbo-roundabouts oﬀer
higher capacities, lower delays and better level of service in comparison with
the existing intersections. Furthermore, turbo-roundabouts present higher safety
levels than typical roundabouts, by reducing conﬂict points from 32 at the typical
roundabouts to only 12 at the proposed turbo-roundabouts.
    Gallelli and Vaiana (2019) studied the safety improvements achieved when
transforming a standard existing roundabout, with unbalanced ﬂow distribution,
into an egg turbo-roundabout, using VISSIM simulation software and then
SSAM for traﬃc conﬂicts detection. The authors collected video-observed traﬃc
information regarding speeds, critical gaps, queue lengths, and ﬂoating car data
at an existing roundabout for its simulation in VISSIM, with its corresponding
calibration. Then, they simulated the proposed turbo-roundabout using the
previously calibrated parameters. As result, they compared the two roundabout
scenarios based on the spatial distribution of the simulated traﬃc conﬂicts
determined by SSAM, reporting a strong reduction in the total number of traﬃc
conﬂicts (85%), particularly rear-end conﬂicts (95%). Finally, the authors state
that “more reliable indications must be obtained in terms of safety measures, for
example considering other kinds of intersections and speciﬁc safety parameters
(TTCmin , PET, DR, etc.)”.
    Balado et al. (2019) modeled a turbo-roundabout and a roundabout with
Petri nets, which are both graphical and mathematical representations that allow
a realistic modeling of urban systems. They used the results of the model to
analyze and to compare the traﬃc safety through indicators of complexity at both
intersections. The case study corresponds to a real-world transformation from
roundabout to turbo-roundabout. Petri nets allowed conﬁrming the complexity of
the network at the roundabout, as well as the large number of maneuvers that a
driver can do in it. The geometry of the turbo-roundabout causes the possibilities
of movement to be reduced, limiting the options to the driver. The researchers
modeled the main maneuvers causing accidents and presented their solutions in a
turbo-roundabout. They conclude that the turbo-roundabout is safer, given the
short displacements and that Petri nets are applicable to circular systems.
    Elhassy et al. (2020) used VISSIM for determining the traﬃc implications of
converting a high-volume multi-lane roundabout into a turbo-roundabout. They
examined three diﬀerent designs for comparing the two types of roundabouts. The
authors proposed better designs of the roundabout, reﬂected in the improvement
of the level of service. Their results showed that the capacity of the conventional

                   Revista Colombiana de Estadística - Applied Statistics 44 (2021) 91–121

Multivariate Safety Assessment of Roundabouts                                           97

three-lane roundabout was higher than the capacity of the turbo-roundabouts,
concluding that turbo-roundabouts are not suitable for intersections with traﬃc
volumes exceeding 4500 vehicles per hour.
    Liu et al. (2020) evaluated the safety and traﬃc performance of turbo-
roundabouts for a ﬁve-branch roundabout in Shanghai. The authors built VISSIM
models for the roundabout and the proposed turbo-roundabout, performing several
tests under diverse traﬃc volumes and central island radius. Subsequently,
they analyzed the conﬂict statistics extracted from the trajectory ﬁles in SSAM,
using TTCmin and DeltaV as safety indicators and conﬂict frequency for safety
performance evaluation. The ﬁndings remark that the turbo-roundabout could
enhance the safety performance in most volume situations. The turbo-roundabout
design presented a limitation regarding transportation eﬀectiveness. High traﬃc
volumes with large radius could cause important delays compared with no-
channelized designs. Finally, the authors provided design and construction
procedures when using the turbo-roundabout concept.
    Based on the literature review, surrogate safety measures have traditionally
been used with an univariate approach, which supports the hypothesis and the
research problem that give rise to this paper and to the opportunity for exploring
the performing and validity of multivariate analysis of such surrogate measures.


1.5. Hypothesis and Objective
    Since, traditionally, surrogate measures of safety are used in an univariate way,
our research hypothesis states that it is possible to determine which one is the
safest intersection between a conventional roundabout and a turbo-roundabout,
based on traﬃc conﬂicts and using simultaneously the six surrogate measures,
deﬁned above, by means of multivariate methods.
    Therefore, the objective of this paper is to assess and to compare the
traﬃc safety performance, of two types of roundabouts, using multivariate
statistical techniques, such as clustering, principal components analysis (PCA)
and discriminant analysis, under a preventive approach.


2. Methods
2.1. Study Site
    The two-lane roundabout, we evaluated in this study, is located in the
Colombia’s capital, Bogotá (Figure 3 left). As Bulla-Cruz et al. (2020) stated,
this roundabout is the traﬃc control mechanism between the 72I Avenue and 43A
South Street (4◦ 36’09.19”N 74◦ 08’56.56”W), in a residential neighborhood of the
city, with an estimated Average Daily Traﬃc (ADT) of 18,000 motor vehicles.
    During the peak traﬃc operation hour, we collected on video and ﬁeld the
necessary data (i.e. geometry, traﬃc volumes, and speed) for modeling in VISSIM
5.3 software. Table 1 shows the peak hour mixed traﬃc volumes per roundabout

                    Revista Colombiana de Estadística - Applied Statistics 44 (2021) 91–121

98                                  Lenin Bulla-Cruz, Liliana Lyons & Enrique Darghan


entrance, per movement allowed. We entered the traﬃc volumes into the model
in periods of 15 minutes, according to ﬁeld information.
          Table 1: Peak hour mixed traﬃc volumes per roundabout entrance.
                       Entrance    Movement     Traﬃc volume (v/h)
                        North       Through                  47
                                     Right                   44
                                      Left                   37
                                     U-turn                  0
                        South       Through                  86
                                     Right                   21
                                      Left                 610
                                     U-turn                  3
                         West       Through                776
                                     Right                 404
                                      Left                   12
                                     U-turn                  4
                         East       Through                221
                                     Right                   31
                                      Left                   10
                                     U-turn                  2


   In VISSIM, the behavior of drivers at roundabout entrances is governed by the
gap acceptance theory. Accordingly, we determined the critical gaps on video, as
Table 2 shows.
          Table 2: Peak hour mixed traﬃc volumes per roundabout entrance.
                Left lane of the main road accessing to           Critical gap (s)
                Inner lane of the roundabout                            2.0
                Outer lane of the roundabout                            2.0
                Right lane of the main road accessing to          Critical gap (s)
                Inner lane of the roundabout                            1.8
                Outer lane of the roundabout                            3.6
                Single lane of secondary road accessing to        Critical gap (s)
                Inner lane of the roundabout                            2.0
                Outer lane of the roundabout                            2.0


    The model also required the allocation of operating speeds and free-ﬂow speed
distributions at diﬀerent sites of the roundabout, in order to generate a realistic
simulation. The maximum and minimum values of these distributions are:

     • Branches: max 60 (km/h) and min 25 (km/h).

                    Revista Colombiana de Estadística - Applied Statistics 44 (2021) 91–121

Multivariate Safety Assessment of Roundabouts                                                99

  • Roundabout ring: max 30 (km/h) and min 20 (km/h).

  • Entrances: max 25 (km/h) and min 15 (km/h).

   On the other hand, given that the turbo-roundabout is a virtual proposal and
that, to date, there is not one of these intersections in full operation in Bogotá, it
was necessary to use critical gaps reported by Fortuijn (2009), for existing turbo-
roundabouts in The Netherlands, as follows:

  • Left lane of the main road: 3.37 s.

  • Right lane of the main road: 3.67 s.

  • Left lane of the secondary road: 3.07 s.

   Based on traﬃc volumes and the available space, Figure 3 (right) shows the
top view of the proposed turbo-roundabout design. Given this design, we adopted
the desired operating speeds according to the radius of curvature of the diﬀerent
geometric elements of the road, in accordance with the design guidelines presented
by Ministerio de Transporte - INVÍAS (2008).




                                                                          0   10   20
                                                                                    Meters


      Figure 3: Study site (left) and proposed turbo-roundabout design (right).


   With the purpose of evaluating the road safety of the roundabout from traﬃc
conﬂicts, ﬁeld information included empirical count of conﬂicts, without assessing
their severity. As we deﬁne above, the traﬃc conﬂict is an event in which two
road users approach each other in space and time, with collision course, to such
an extent that there is a risk of collision if their movements remain unchanged.
The empirical count consisted on identifying and counting such events, observing
repeatedly the intersection operation videos, during the peak hour. Laureshyn
and Varhelyi (2018) present the speciﬁc guidelines on conﬂict observation and
identiﬁcation.


2.2. VISSIM Simulation Models
  The simulation models are fed with the information described above.
Additionally, VISSIM is based on a psycho-physical perception driving behavior
model composed by several parameters, known as Wiedemann 74 model (PTV
AG, 2012), which deﬁnes the vehicular behavior (i.e., following, lane change and

                    Revista Colombiana de Estadística - Applied Statistics 44 (2021) 91–121

100                                Lenin Bulla-Cruz, Liliana Lyons & Enrique Darghan


lateral), allowing the breaking of the lane discipline and simulating the ﬁltering
of motorcycles between other vehicles, as it happens in Bogotá. We kept most
of the parameters at their default values. However, we modiﬁed two of them,
according to ﬁeld measurements, since we considered them essential to achieve a
good simulation:

  • Average standstill distance: is the average distance in standstill or waiting
    condition between consecutive vehicles. The ﬁeld-observed value of this
    parameter was 0.7 m.

  • Speeds for the deﬁnition of the queue condition: we assumed that a vehicle
    enters the queue condition when its speed is less than 8 km/h and leaves the
    condition at 4 km/h, once it starts to accelerate.

    The simulation model needs to be validated by comparing the magnitudes
of diﬀerent traﬃc parameters, ﬁeld-observed against simulated. In case the
validation is not achieved, it is necessary to calibrate parameters of the model and
verify the validation again, in an iterative process, as presented in the following
sections. Based on the above input information, Figure 4 (left) shows the simulated
roundabout; once we validated this model, we modeled the turbo-roundabout
under the validated VISSIM environment. Therefore, Figure 4 (right) shows the
simulated turbo-roundabout.




Figure 4: Microsimulation in the current situation (left) and proposed turbo-
          roundabout (right)




2.3. Surrogate Safety Assessment Model - SSAM
    The Federal Highway Administration (Gettman et al., 2008), reported that
SSAM and its validation “resulted in the development of a software tool that
derives surrogate safety measures for traﬃc facilities from data output by traﬃc
simulation models. By comparing simulation design cases, SSAM allows analysts
to statistically judge relative safety of designs. An open-standard vehicle trajectory
data format was designed; support for this format is added as an output option
by four simulation model vendors/developers: PTV (VISSIM), TSS (AIMSUN),
Quadstone (Paramics), Rioux Engineering (TEXAS)” and, recently, the Enhanced

                    Revista Colombiana de Estadística - Applied Statistics 44 (2021) 91–121

Multivariate Safety Assessment of Roundabouts                                                                 101

Transportation Flow Open Source Microscopic Model (ETFOMM). Besides, in
SSAM, conﬂict type is deﬁned by the conﬂict angle between the trajectories of
two road users (Zhou et al., 2011). Conﬂict types are: rear-end (0◦ - 45◦ ),
crossing (45◦ - 135◦ ) and head-on (135◦ - 180◦ ). Figure 5 shows the process for
obtaining surrogate safety measures, using VISSIM and SSAM, which includes: [i]
the construction of the VISSIM model based on ﬁeld data, [ii] the calibration of
the model by modifying VISSIM parameters, [iii] the validation of the model by
comparing video-observed traﬃc parameters against simulated traﬃc parameters
(i.g., traﬃc volumes, queue length, delay), [iv] once the model is validated, the
trajectory ﬁles are extracted to be processed in SSAM, [v] the model validation
based on the comparison between the number of video-observed traﬃc conﬂicts
and the number of simulated traﬃc conﬂicts, and [vi] once the model is valid, by
both traﬃc and conﬂicts, the surrogate safety measures for the simulated conﬂicts,
reported by SSAM, are considered valid. By default, SSAM presents a TTCmin
≤ 1.5 s, which can be assumed to ﬁlter out serious conﬂicts when there is no ﬁeld
conﬂicts count but —when there is a count as in this study— it is necessary to
calibrate TTCmin for eliminating such an assumption. The above supports the
methodological approach of this study, which presents the following section.
                    First calibration:                      Second calibration:
                     Traffic volumes                         Traffic conflicts




       Fiel data   Simulation models     Trajectory files         SSAM            Surrogate safety measures

  Figure 5: The VISSIM and SSAM process, adapted from Gettman et al. (2008).



2.4. Methodological Approach
   For the proposed evaluation, we followed the steps of Figure 6 to obtain the
traﬃc conﬂicts and their surrogate safety measures for both intersections —based
on the method proposed by Huang et al. (2013)— using VISSIM and SSAM.
    Methodological development included the following steps: [i] in VISSIM, we
successfully validated a microsimulation model of the two-lane roundabout by
comparing average values of diﬀerent observed and simulated traﬃc indicators;
we used the Wiedemann 74 car-following model due to the urban setting of
the study site; once traﬃc demand for the roundabout was known, we designed
and simulated a proposed basic turbo-roundabout under the previous calibrated
VISSIM environment, [ii] we extracted the vehicular trajectory ﬁles from validated
simulation models which we analyzed using SSAM to obtain the amount and
type of traﬃc conﬂicts and their surrogate measures; the evaluation required the
calibration process described in Section 3, ﬁnally, [iii] we statistically analyzed the
traﬃc conﬂicts and surrogate measures by means of cluster, principal component
and discriminant analysis to compare the two intersections in terms of traﬃc safety.


                    Revista Colombiana de Estadística - Applied Statistics 44 (2021) 91–121

102                                                    Lenin Bulla-Cruz, Liliana Lyons & Enrique Darghan

                                                                             Basic information



                                   Field information: volumes, speed, empirical count of
                                                                                                                      Geometry
                                   traffic conflicts, Wiedemann 74 behavior parameters


                                                                    VISSIM microsimulation model
                                   First calibration: comparison between observed and simulated traffic indicators: volumes, delays and
                                                                                 queues
         Modify driver
      behavior parameters
                                    Model validation: linear regressions, R2 and GEH           Satisfied          Extraction of
                   Unsatisfied      between observed and simulated traffic volumes                               trajectory files


                                                                          SSAM processing
                                      Second calibration : comparison between observed and simulated traffic conflicts and TTCmin

   Modify conflict areas
       parameters                                 Validation methods:                                          Statistical analysis:
                                                     Relative error                            Satisfied
                   Unsatisfied                   Total conflicts and type                                  Number of traffic conflicts
                                   Proximity between calculated and theoretical TTCmin                     Surrogate safety measures


                                                                                         End


                                      Figure 6: Methodological approach.




2.5. Clustering Analysis, PCA and Discriminant Analysis

    Everitt et al. (2011) stated that “cluster analysis and other multivariate
analysis techniques are now often called data mining”. Clustering analysis is a
way to summarize large databases and grouping events (i.e. traﬃc conﬂicts in this
paper, and variables or surrogate measures of safety, that indicate their severity)
to identify, in analogy to medicine sciences, which treatment —roundabout type—
is the best solution against a disease —traﬃc crashes. According to Pardo and
del Campo (2007), in this research the formation of clusters is synonymous with
classiﬁcation, since it seeks to classify each traﬃc conﬂict in a certain type of
roundabout, according to its severity.
    Although cluster analysis can provide a good approximation to the solution
of the problem, it is interesting to verify whether it is possible to reduce the
size of the database without losing interpretation of the results. The PCA allows
obtaining such reduction and interpreting data (Washington et al., 2011). Sánchez
et al. (2008) state that the PCA is a data representation technique focused on the
reduction of dimension. After dimensional reduction, the obtained Discriminant
function analysis (DFA) lets the classiﬁcation of unknown individuals —traﬃc
conﬂicts— and the probability of their classiﬁcation into a certain group, such
as roundabout type (Moore, 2013). The discriminant analysis divides the sample
space into sub-spaces by means of hyper-planes that allow estimating the best
possible separation of the groups under study (Barajas and Morales, 2009).

                                 Revista Colombiana de Estadística - Applied Statistics 44 (2021) 91–121

Multivariate Safety Assessment of Roundabouts                                          103

3. Results and Discussion
3.1. Model Calibration by Traﬃc and Conﬂicts
   According to the stages raised in the methodology, we built the microsimulation
model of the existing roundabout. Afterwards, we ran ten random runs of the
model and we compared the mean values of the simulated traﬃc parameters against
the ﬁeld values using linear regressions for calibrating and validating the model.
Maximum observed queue length per approach presented a R2 = 0.97, while the
average delay per approach presented a R2 = 0.64. The GEH Statistic = 0.56
was calculated for sum of all link traﬃc ﬂows, comparing observed and simulated
volumes, a GEH< 4 indicates a successful calibration, in accordance with
Dowling et al. (2004).
   We adopted the process proposed by Huang et al. (2013) to calibrate the
model in terms of conﬂicts. A well-tuned model returns low relative error, when
comparing the number of simulated conﬂicts against observed conﬂicts, indicating
the achievement of a good calibration. However, this calibration is complex
because the number of ﬁeld conﬂicts depends on observer’s perception. Moreover,
TTCmin , related to the consideration of when a conﬂict ceases to be mild and
becomes serious, may vary according to such individual perception, being 1.5 s
the most accepted value proposed by Hydén (1987).
    We used the variation of TTCmin to calibrate SSAM by comparing the amount
of observed and simulated conﬂicts, estimating the TTCmin value that produces
the lowest relative error between quantities. The purpose is to verify how close
local TTCmin is to TTCmin = 1.5 s. Figure 7 shows that a TTCmin = 1.37 s
produces a relative error of 4.46% between the total of observed and simulated
conﬂicts; this TTCmin satisﬁes both rear-end and crossing conﬂicts and the
total that corresponds to their sum. In this respect, some authors reported
the local TTCmin of their investigations: Torres et al. (2010), 1.4 s at suburban
priority T-type intersections in Santiago (Chile) and Huang et al. (2013), 1.6 s at
signalized intersections in Nanjing (China). In this study, we noticed that observers
paid more attention to most severe conﬂicts, not considering all the serious
events. Since aggressive driver behavior is common at Bogotá’s roundabouts.
The above statement explains a TTCmin lower than those reported in other
countries. We clariﬁed that there were no conﬂicts with pedestrians or cyclists.
Once we calibrated the base model, we built the turbo-roundabout model under
the previously calibrated VISSIM environment, adapting the geometric design to
available space.




                    Revista Colombiana de Estadística - Applied Statistics 44 (2021) 91–121

104                                                       Lenin Bulla-Cruz, Liliana Lyons & Enrique Darghan

                                    30
                                                                                                    Total
                                                                                                    Rear-end
                                    25
                                                                                                    Crossing


                                    20




               Relative error (%)
                                    15
                                                                              1.37 s
                                    10


                                    5


                                    0
                                         1.1        1.2           1.3                  1.4            1.5
                                                                    TTC (s)

  Figure 7: Relative error between ﬁeld and simulated conﬂicts based on TTCmin .




3.2. Comparative Assessment Based on Number of Conﬂicts
    Based on calibrated TTCmin = 1.37 s, we obtained the number of serious
conﬂicts at the roundabout and at the turbo-roundabout (see Table 3). The total
number of conﬂicts at the roundabout was 338, which corresponds to 209 (rear-end)
and 129 (crossing). At the turbo-roundabout, the total was 96, corresponding to 44
(rear-end) and 52 (crossing). The above quantities and their diﬀerence, by conﬂict
type, translate into a percentage change in favor of the turbo-roundabout, of -
72%, -79% and -60%, respectively. These results are congruent with Vasconcelos
et al. (2014), that found a total of 329 conﬂicts at the roundabout and 92 at the
turbo-roundabout, implying a 72% reduction, too. Likewise, this decreasing is
consistent with the beneﬁts, in terms of crashes reduction (80%), at intersections
regulated by roundabouts and replaced by turbo-roundabouts, in The Netherlands
(Fortuijn, 2009).

      Table 3: Comparison between intersections based on the number of conﬂicts.
                                     Parameter                Total    Rear-end               Crossing
                                     Angle Threshold             -     0◦ - 45◦              45◦ - 135◦
                                     Roundabout                338       209                    129
                                     Turbo-roundabout           96        44                     52
                                     Diﬀerence                 242       165                     77
                                     Change                   -72%      -79%                   -60%


   Figure 8 shows the location of simulated conﬂicts generated by SSAM for a
total of ten model runs, with a TTCmin of 1.37 s. As shown, density of crossing
conﬂicts (blue squares) and rear-end conﬂicts (yellow circles) is lower at the turbo-
roundabout. Concentration of events allows observing speciﬁc conﬂict areas. This
model highlights the elimination of conﬂicts in a large part of the roundabout ring,
improving road safety and inducing road users to a safer driving behavior.

                                         Revista Colombiana de Estadística - Applied Statistics 44 (2021) 91–121

Multivariate Safety Assessment of Roundabouts                                          105




Figure 8: Location of simulated conﬂicts at existing roundabout (left) and at proposed
          turbo-roundabout (right).



3.3. Statistical Analysis for Surrogate Measures Validation

   We obtained six surrogate measures of safety, from models in VISSIM and
SSAM, for each traﬃc conﬂict simulated. We performed several regression models
between pairs of surrogate measures with the aim of verifying the consistency of the
values obtained and validating both simulation models and surrogate measures.
Figure 9 to Figure 12 show the polynomial regression models that presented the
best ﬁt.
    Figure 9 shows the polynomial regression between TTCmin and PET for the
roundabout and the turbo-roundabout. In both roundabouts the tendency is valid,
according to the theory, given that when TTCmin increases PET also does, being
PET ≥ TTCmin in the vast majority of cases. Figure 9 also presents the conﬁdence
interval (95%) of the regression model (green area) and the prediction interval
(yellow area).
    The continuous line has slope = 1, which means a 1:1 ratio between the two
variables. The dots below this line correspond to conﬂicts in which there was
acceleration rather than deceleration to avoid conﬂict. These conﬂicts do not
match with the American conﬂict technique, in which deceleration is part of evasive
action. Despite the above, we maintained such conﬂicts within the evaluation
to incorporate atypical situations generated by simulation models. In this case,
acceleration maneuvers are justiﬁed due to aggressiveness considered in the model
to achieve its validation.
    Figure 10 presents the polynomial regression between TTCmin and MaxS.
At both roundabouts, we observed that the higher the TTCmin the smaller is
MaxS. As is to be expected, when traveling at a low speed the TTCmin presents
safer values in most conﬂicts. At the roundabout, there is a notoriously greater
number of conﬂicts with TTCmin ≈ 0 than at the turbo-roundabout. Despite
this diﬀerence, at the turbo-roundabout these conﬂicts occurred at higher speeds,
given elimination of lateral conﬂicts due to geometry. In general, TTCmin and
MaxS present safer values at the turbo-roundabout.

                    Revista Colombiana de Estadística - Applied Statistics 44 (2021) 91–121

106                                       Lenin Bulla-Cruz, Liliana Lyons & Enrique Darghan




                 PET (s)


                                                 TTCmin (s)
                 PET (s)




                                                 TTCmin (s)

  Figure 9: TTCmin vs. PET at roundabout (up) and at turbo-roundabout (down).



     Figure 11 shows that, at the roundabout, there are more conﬂicts with positive
DR than at the turbo-roundabout and these conﬂicts have a TTCmin ≈ 0. This is
evidence of aggressive driving behavior generated for model validation, as well as
virtual crashes with TTCmin = 0 that VISSIM generates due to simulation errors
of this software, which is constantly improving. In general, at both intersections,
it is necessary a more negative DR to achieve a safe TTCmin , consequently linked
with MaxS.
   Figure 12 presents the relationship between TTCmin and conﬂict angle. At
both intersections, we observed that for low conﬂict angle values, TTCmin values
are higher. Therefore, the smaller the conﬂict angle the safer is the conﬂict. This
tendency is more evident at the turbo-roundabout because it let a smaller angular
threshold with safer TTCmin .
    Table 4 and Figure 13 show the univariate statistical analysis of data. TTCmin
and PET indicate a safer operation at the turbo-roundabout. However, MaxS
and DeltaS indicate that conﬂicting speeds are higher at the turbo-roundabout
and, due to this, the variables related to deceleration, DR and MaxS, are more
negative. Accordingly, Figure 13 shows Pearson’s correlation matrices of surrogate
safety measures for both roundabouts. The high correlations between variables
indicated the needing of the application of multivariate statistical techniques to
study the problem. We used RStudio, and the corrplot (Wei et al., 2017) and
psych (Revelle, 2018) packages in this analysis.


                           Revista Colombiana de Estadística - Applied Statistics 44 (2021) 91–121

Multivariate Safety Assessment of Roundabouts                                            107




                   MaxS (m/s)
                                             TTCmin (s)
                   MaxS (m/s)




                                            TTCmin (s)
 Figure 10: TTCmin vs. MaxS at roundabout (up) and at turbo-roundabout (down).
                   DR (m/s2 )




                                             TTCmin (s)
                   DR (m/s2 )




                                             TTCmin (s)

  Figure 11: TTCmin vs. DR at roundabout (up) and at turbo-roundabout (down).




                      Revista Colombiana de Estadística - Applied Statistics 44 (2021) 91–121

108                                                   Lenin Bulla-Cruz, Liliana Lyons & Enrique Darghan




                  Conflict angle ( )



                                                               TTCmin (s)
                  Conflict angle ( )




                                                               TTCmin (s)
Figure 12: TTCmin vs. Conﬂict angle at roundabout (up) and at turbo-roundabout
           (down).


                                              Table 4: Descriptive statistics.
                                          TTCmin                   MaxS      DeltaS      DR        MaxD
      Parameter                                      PET (s)
                                            (s)                    (m/s)     (m/s)      (m/s2 )    (m/s2 )
      Roundabout
        Mean                                0.32       0.53         5.42      3.78       -0.46      -1.11
  Standard Deviation                        0.49       0.89         2.27      2.16       2.16       2.67
  Turbo-roundabout
        Mean                                0.61       1.10         7.68      7.19       -2.64      -2.91
  Standard Deviation                        0.55       1.12         2.63      2.61       2.69       2.65




                                       Revista Colombiana de Estadística - Applied Statistics 44 (2021) 91–121

Multivariate Safety Assessment of Roundabouts                                          109




Figure 13: Pearson’s correlations matrices of Surrogate measures, roundabout (left) and
           turbo-roundabout (right).




Figure 14: Boxplots of surrogate measures, roundabout (up) and turbo-roundabout
           (down).



3.4. Complete-Linkage Clustering Analysis
    In accordance with Johnson and Wichern (2007), we tested diﬀerent
hierarchical clustering methods and assigning distances, under conditions of
standardization and non-standardization of variables. We evidenced that a better
interpretation of the clusters is obtained when the variables are not standardized;
this is because all variables are time-based. In this regard, Milligan and Cooper
(1988) state that “deciding on a suitable form of standardization of variables can
improve recovery of the true cluster structure, but it is only one of several decisions
faced by the applied researcher”.

                    Revista Colombiana de Estadística - Applied Statistics 44 (2021) 91–121

110                                       Lenin Bulla-Cruz, Liliana Lyons & Enrique Darghan


   Based on the before-mentioned, we discussed a complete-linkage clustering
analysis and Euclidean distance. This analysis produced the cluster structure
that better explain the relationship between variables and type of roundabout. In
accordance with Punj and Stewart (1983), this method is also known as furthest
neighbor cluster analysis, in which “an observation is joined to a cluster if it has
a certain level of similarity with all current members of the cluster”. We carried
out the analysis using RStudio and the dendextend package (Galili, 2015).
    As shown in Figure 15, a ﬁrst cluster analysis with original variables allowed
noticing that conﬂicts at the turbo-roundabout (green labels) tend to group in a
single cluster (cluster 2) due to their association with a pattern of driving behavior
induced by road geometry. On the other hand, at the roundabout (cluster 1)
there is greater dispersion because conﬂicts (red labels) can occur in diﬀerent
ways at diﬀerent points of the intersection. At the roundabout, it is not possible
to control or concentrate conﬂict points in speciﬁc locations as eﬀectively as at the
turbo-roundabout.


                                                                                                        Roundabout
                                                                                                         Roundabout
                                                                                                         Roundabout
                                                                                              Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                              Roundabout                    Roundabout
                                                                                                                            Roundabout
                                                                                          Roundabout Roundabout Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                         Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                                 Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                                 Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                  Turbo−roundabout                       Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                          Turbo−roundabout  Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                                   Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                                   Roundabout
                                                                                                                    Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                                             Roundabout
                                                                                                                             Roundabout
                                                                                                                         Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                                     Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                                      Roundabout
                                                                                                                      Roundabout
                                                                                                                 Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                                 Roundabout
                                                                                                          Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                 Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                 Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                    Turbo−roundabout        Roundabout
                                                                                                Roundabout               Roundabout
                                                                                           Roundabout                 Roundabout
                                                                                                                      Roundabout
                                                                                                            Roundabout
                                                                                                      Roundabout          Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                                       Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                                           Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                                           Roundabout
                                                                                                                         Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                                           Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                                           Roundabout
                                                                                                                           Roundabout
                                                                                                                           Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                                      Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                                   Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                                             Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                                            Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                                         Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                                      Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                                     Roundabout
                                                                                                               Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                              Roundabout  Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                                          Roundabout
                                                                                                                    RoundaboutTurbo−roundabout
                                                                                                                              Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                                        Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                                Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                    Turbo−roundabout Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                                     Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                                            Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                                            Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                                             Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                                             Roundabout
                                                                                                                         Roundabout
                                                                                                                       Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                                             Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                                             Roundabout
                                                                                                                            Roundabout
                                                                                                                            Roundabout
                                                                                                           Roundabout Roundabout
                                                                                                                          Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                                         Roundabout
                                                                                                                  Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                         Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                              Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                           Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                             Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                   Turbo−roundabout      Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                                            Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                                            Turbo−roundabout
                                                                             Turbo−roundabout              RoundaboutRoundabout
                                                                                       Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                       Roundabout                   Roundabout
                                                                                                                Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                                    Roundabout
                                                                                                    Roundabout Roundabout
                                                                                                           Roundabout
                                                                                                         Roundabout    Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                                       Roundabout
                                                                                                                Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                                  Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                                  Roundabout
                                                                                                                       Roundabout
                                                                                                                     Roundabout
                                                                                                                    Roundabout
                                                                                                           Roundabout
                                                                                                           Roundabout
                                                                                                             Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                             Roundabout  Roundabout
                                                                                                                              Roundabout
                                                                                                                              Roundabout
                                                                                                                              Roundabout
                                                                                                                             Roundabout
                                                                                                                        Roundabout
                                                                                                                       Roundabout
                                                                                                                       Roundabout
                                                                                                         Roundabout Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                                  Roundabout
                                                                                                                  Roundabout
                                                                                                                     Roundabout
                                                                                                                      Roundabout
                                                                                                                           Roundabout
                                                                                                                           Roundabout
                                                                                                                          Roundabout
                                                                                                                        Roundabout
                                                                                                                    Roundabout Roundabout
                                                                                                                        Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                                  Roundabout Roundabout
                                                                                                                      Roundabout
                                                                                                             Roundabout
                                                                                                                              Roundabout
                                                                                                                           Roundabout
                                                                                                                      Roundabout
                                                                                                                          Roundabout
                                                                                                                    Roundabout
                                                                                                                 Roundabout
                                                                                                                    Roundabout
                                                                                                                           Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                                           Roundabout
                                                                                                                           Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                                           Roundabout
                                                                                                                         Roundabout
                                                                                                                        Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                                     Roundabout
                                                                                                                           Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                                           Roundabout
                                                                                                                       Roundabout
                                                                                                                          Roundabout
                                                                                                                          Roundabout
                                                                                                                  Roundabout
                                                                                                                       Roundabout
                                                                                                                      Roundabout
                                                                                                                     Roundabout
                                                                                                                   Roundabout
                                                                                                               Roundabout
                                                                                                    Roundabout          Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                                        Roundabout
                                                                                                                     Roundabout
                                                                                                                       Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                                       Roundabout
                                                                                                            Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                            Roundabout
                                                                                                             Roundabout
                                                                                                              Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                 Roundabout Roundabout
                                                                                                            RoundaboutRoundabout
                                                                                                                    Roundabout
                                                                                                                           Roundabout
                                                                                                                           Roundabout
                                                                                                               Roundabout
                                                                                                               Roundabout     Roundabout
                                                                                                                    Roundabout
                                                                                                    Roundabout Roundabout
                                                                                                Roundabout                 Roundabout
                                                                                                              RoundaboutRoundabout
                                                                                                        Roundabout       Roundabout
                                                                                                                      Roundabout
                                                                                                                        Roundabout
                                                                                                           Roundabout   Roundabout
                                                                                                                     Roundabout
                                                                                                                      Roundabout
                                                                                                                 Roundabout
                                                                                                                        Roundabout
                                                                                                                  Roundabout
                                                                                                                        Roundabout
                                                                                                                        Roundabout
                                                                                                                 Roundabout
                                                                                                                          Roundabout
                                                                                                                  Roundabout
                                                                                                                         Roundabout
                                                                                                               Roundabout
                                                                                                                        Roundabout
                                                                                                                      Roundabout
                                                                                                                      Roundabout
                                                                                                             Roundabout
                                                                                                         Roundabout    Roundabout
                                                                                         Roundabout                        Roundabout
                                                                                                   Roundabout   Roundabout
                                                                                                         Roundabout
                                                                                                         Roundabout
                                                                                                      Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                                   Roundabout
                                                                                                                             Roundabout
                                                                                                                        Roundabout
                                                                                                                       Roundabout
                                                                                                                     Roundabout
                                                                                                                   Roundabout
                                                                                                                  Roundabout
                                                                                                                  Roundabout
                                                                                                              Roundabout
                                                                                                         Roundabout    Roundabout
                                                                                                                 Roundabout
                                                                                                                   Roundabout
                                                                                                                            Roundabout
                                                                                                                         Roundabout
                                                                                                                       Roundabout
                                                                                                         Roundabout Roundabout
                                                                                                                          Roundabout
                                                                                                                           Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                                           Roundabout
                                                                                                                   Roundabout
                                                                                                                        Roundabout
                                                                                                                       Roundabout
                                                                                                                    Roundabout
                                                                                                                            Roundabout
                                                                                                                Roundabout  Roundabout
                                                                                                                  Roundabout
                                                                                                             Roundabout    Roundabout
                                                                                                                   Roundabout
                                                                                                              Roundabout
                                                                                            Roundabout                      Roundabout
                                                                                                                          Roundabout
                                                                                                                               Roundabout
                                                                                                                              Roundabout
                                                                                                                              Roundabout
                                                                                                                            Roundabout
                                                                                                                           Roundabout
                                                                                                                            Roundabout
                                                                                                              Roundabout
                                                                                                                      Roundabout
                                                                                                                      Roundabout
                                                                                                                         Roundabout
                                                                                                                            Roundabout
                                                                                                                           Roundabout
                                                                                                                              Roundabout
                                                                                                                             Roundabout
                                                                                                                           Roundabout
                                                                                                                            Roundabout
                                                                                                                            Roundabout
                                                                                                                         Roundabout
                                                                                                                    Roundabout
                                                                                                                         Roundabout
                                                                                                                            Roundabout
                                                                                                                   Roundabout
                                                                                                                            Roundabout
                                                                                                                         Roundabout
                                                                                                                        Roundabout
                                                                                                                               Roundabout
                                                                                                                            Roundabout
                                                                                                                              Roundabout
                                                                                 Roundabout                                   Roundabout
                                                                                                                       Roundabout
                Line types                                                                                   Roundabout     Roundabout
                                                                                                                            Roundabout
                                                                                                                             Roundabout
                                                                                         Roundabout                Roundabout
                                                                                                                           Roundabout
                                                                                                                      Roundabout
                                                                                                                      Roundabout
                                                                                                                           Roundabout
                                                                                                                           Roundabout
                                                                                                                        Roundabout
                                                                                                                Roundabout
                                                                                                                         Roundabout
              Roundabout                                                                                                     Roundabout
                                                                                                                               Roundabout
                                                                                                                             Roundabout
                                                                                                                            Roundabout
                                                                                                                       Roundabout
                                                                                                          Roundabout
                                                                                                                Roundabout
                                                                                                     Roundabout
                                                                                                     Roundabout
                                                                                                  Roundabout
              Turbo−roundabout                                  Roundabout
                                                                                                              Roundabout
                                                                                                       Roundabout
                                                                                                          Roundabout
                                                                                                          Roundabout
                                                                                         Roundabout
                                                                                                   Roundabout Roundabout
                                                                                                                       Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                                       Roundabout
                                                                                                                 Roundabout
              Cluster 1                                                                                       Roundabout Roundabout
                                                                                                                     Roundabout
                                                                                                                             Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                                Roundabout
                                                                                                        Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                        Roundabout
                                                                                                             Roundabout  Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                             Roundabout
              Cluster 2                                                                                               Roundabout
                                                                                                                        Roundabout
                                                                                                                        Roundabout
                                                                                                                     Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                                     Roundabout
                                                                                                                     Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                                     Roundabout
                                                                                                                          Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                                          Roundabout
                                                                                                                    Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                     Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                     Roundabout                     Roundabout




          20            15               10                5                 0
  Figure 15: Dendrogram of complete-linkage clustering analysis with original data.




                           Revista Colombiana de Estadística - Applied Statistics 44 (2021) 91–121

Multivariate Safety Assessment of Roundabouts                                                                                                                              111

   Figure 16 (left) shows a three-dimensional graphic relating TTCmin , PET and
MaxS. Clouds of dots correspond to conﬂicts of cluster 1 (blue dots) and cluster
2 (red dots). As mentioned above, conﬂicts of the turbo-roundabout belong
to cluster 2. Three-dimensional graphical analysis of clusters allowed verifying
that surrogate measures indicate safer operation at the turbo-roundabout.
Nevertheless, some conﬂicts in this intersection showed high values of MaxS, as it
was also observed in Figure 10.
   Figure 16 (right) shows a three-dimensional graph relating DR, MaxD and
DeltaS. In general, cluster 1 provided evidence of aggressive driving behavior at the
roundabout, given the important number of conﬂicts with positive DR and MaxD.
In the same sense, cluster 2 indicated most negative decelerations at the turbo-
roundabout, which agrees with high values of MaxS before-mentioned. DeltaS
indicates that most of conﬂicts at the roundabout had safer speed diﬀerences
between pairs of vehicles. Based on these results, we found that approaching
speeds were higher at the turbo-roundabout and that a greater deceleration was
necessary to avoid collisions, which leads to TTCmin and PET safer.

                                                                                                                                                            Cluster
                                                                                                                                                               1
                                                                                    Cluster
                                                                                       Cluster                                                                 2 Cluster
                                                                                                                                                              Cluster
       15 15                                                                        15 151 1                                                                      1 1
                                                                                         2 2                                                                      2 2
                                                                                                                                                            Centroid
       12 12                                                                        12 12
                                                                                           Centroid
                                                                                         Centroid                                                                    Centroid
                                                                                                                                                                  Centroid
                                                                                                                                                              Cluster  1
        9 9                                                                                Cluster
                                                                                     9 9Cluster  1 1
                                                                                                                                                              Cluster
                                                                                                                                                                          1 1
                                                                                                                                                                     Cluster
                                                                                                                                                                  Cluster
                                                                                                                                                                       22 2
                                                                           DeltaS
                                                                           DeltaS
MaxS
MaxS




                                                                                           Cluster
                                                                                         Cluster 2 2                                                                 Cluster
                                                                                                                                                                  Cluster
        6 6                                                                          6 6

        3 3                                                                          3 3
                                                                           5 5                                                                             4 4
        0 0                                                             4 4          0 0                                                                 2 2
                                                                     3 3                                                                               0 0
                                                                  2 2                                                                              -2 -2
         0 0                                                   1 1 PETPET             -8 -8   -6 -6                                             -4 -4
               0.30.3   0.60.6   0.90.9                                                                -4 -4     -2 -2   0 0
                                                                                                                                                      MaxD
                                                                                                                                             -6 -6 MaxD
                                            1.21.2   1.51.5 0 0                                                                2 2    4 4 -8 -8
                           TTC
                         TTC                                                                                   DRDR

Figure 16: Scatter plot of TTCmin , PET and MaxS (left) and DR, MaxD and DeltaS
           (right).


   Table 5 presents the location coordinates of clusters’ centroids. Based on
centroid of cluster 1, the roundabout has TTCmin and PET values closer to zero,
indicating riskier operation compared to turbo-roundabout operation. In addition,
centroids show that MaxS and DeltaS presented safer values at the roundabout
and indicate that DeltaS does indeed have safer values at the roundabout, as
observed in the clusters. Regarding DR and MaxD, decelerations were higher at
the turbo-roundabout, given the higher approaching speeds to the conﬂict point.
Such decelerations allowed obtaining safer TTCmin and PET.

                                             Table 5: Location of clusters’ centroids.
                                     TTCmin                                          MaxS                      DeltaS             DR                 MaxD
               Cluster                                     PET (s)
                                       (s)                                           (m/s)                     (m/s)             (m/s2 )             (m/s2 )
                    1                      0.32               0.53                    5.42                      3.78                 -0.46            -1.11
                    2                      0.61               1.10                    7.68                      7.19                 -2.64            -2.91




                                          Revista Colombiana de Estadística - Applied Statistics 44 (2021) 91–121

112                                              Lenin Bulla-Cruz, Liliana Lyons & Enrique Darghan


3.5. Principal Components Analysis

    To observe the six variables simultaneously, we reduced the problem
dimensionality using a PCA. We carried out the analysis using RStudio and the
stats package (R Core Team and contributors Worldwide, 2019). The cumulative
variance of the ﬁrst two components was 87.72%, suggesting that is advisable to
use the ﬁrst two components with low loss of information. This is also validated by
the eigenvalues of ﬁrst (15.80), second (9.09) and third components (1.98), which
is consistent with the procedure suggested by Pérez et al. (2006).
   Table 6 and Figure 17 show the loadings of variables into the ﬁrst two principal
components. These values allowed calculating new variables detailed below. We
observed that variables related to deceleration and speed have greatest load in
the ﬁrst principal component (Prin1), with an important load of time. On the
other hand, in second principal component (Prin2), variables related to speed and
deceleration have greatest load, also with an important load of time. The resulting
loads allowed naming the new variables as DST and SDT, respectively.

               Table 6: Components’ cumulative variance, loadings and new variables.
                                                                                                      New
      Component              R2        TTCmin PET         MaxS      DeltaS       DR        MaxD
                                                                                                    variable
          Prin1            55.67%      0.047     0.093    0.332     0.495    -0.527        -0.597    DST
          Prin2            87.72%      -0.057    -0.130   0.644     0.500        0.361     0.430     SDT




          15

          12                                                        MaxS

          9                                                                       DeltaS
                      MaxD
  Prin2




          6
                      DR

          3

          0
                                                          TTC

          -3                                          PET
                -12               -7            -2            3              8               13           18
                                                            Prin1
                      Figure 17: Graphical representation of component loadings.


   We developed a new cluster analysis once extracted the ﬁrst two principal
components. The dendrogram in Figure 18 conﬁrmed that most of conﬂicts at
the turbo-roundabout belong to cluster 2, as we indicated in Figure 15, revealing
low loss of information when classifying conﬂicts based on new variables DST
and SDT.

                              Revista Colombiana de Estadística - Applied Statistics 44 (2021) 91–121

Multivariate Safety Assessment of Roundabouts                                                                              113



                                                                                                       Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                       Roundabout
                                                                                                     Roundabout
                                                                                                       Roundabout
                                                                                                        Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                       Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                       Roundabout
                                                                                                      Roundabout
                                                                                                   Roundabout
                                                                                                     Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                     Roundabout
                    Line types                                                                        Roundabout
                                                                                                      Roundabout
                                                                                                       Roundabout
                                                                                                      Roundabout
                                                                                                   Roundabout
                                                                                                      Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                      Roundabout
                                                                                                       Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                       Roundabout
                                                                                                      Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                      Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                       Roundabout
                                                                                                        Roundabout
                                                                                                        Roundabout
                  Roundabout                                                                             Roundabout
                                                                                                        Roundabout
                                                                                                     Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                     Roundabout
                                                                                                     Roundabout
                                                                                                     Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                     Roundabout
                                                                                                Roundabout
                                                                                                     Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                     Roundabout
                                                                                                  Roundabout
                                                                                                       Roundabout
                  Turbo−roundabout                                                                    Roundabout
                                                                                                    Roundabout
                                                                                                       Roundabout
                                                                                                       Roundabout
                                                                                                 Roundabout
                                                                                                    Roundabout
                                                                                                    Roundabout
                                                                                                    Roundabout
                                                                                                 Roundabout
                                                                                             Roundabout
                                                                                       Roundabout    Roundabout
                                                                                                Roundabout
                                                                                                   Roundabout
                  Cluster 1                                                                        Roundabout
                                                                                                 Roundabout
                                                                                             Roundabout
                                                                                                    Roundabout
                                                                                           Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                          Roundabout
                                                                   Turbo−roundabout                     Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                        Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                      Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                        Turbo−roundabout
                  Cluster 2                                                                           Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                      Roundabout
                                                                                                      Roundabout
                                                                                                      Roundabout
                                                                                                       Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                       Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                      Roundabout
                                                                                                        Roundabout
                                                                                                      Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                      Roundabout
                                                                                                       Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                       Roundabout
                                                                                                       Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                       Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                               Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                    Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                    Roundabout
                                                                                                     Roundabout
                                                                                                     Roundabout
                                                                                                 Roundabout
                                                                                               Roundabout
                                                                                                 Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                 Roundabout
                                                                                                     Roundabout
                                                                                                     Roundabout
                                                                                                Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                    Roundabout
                                                                                                    Roundabout
                                                                                                Roundabout
                                                                                                       Roundabout
                                                                                                       Roundabout
                                                                                                    Roundabout
                                                                                                        Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                        Roundabout
                                                                                                      Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                  Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                  Roundabout
                                                                                                       Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                       Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                  Roundabout
                                                                                              Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                     Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                        Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                        Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                              Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                              Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                       Roundabout
                                                                                                       Roundabout
                                                                                                    Roundabout
                                                                                                         Roundabout
                                                                                                         Roundabout
                                                                                                       Roundabout
                                                                                                     Roundabout
                                                                                                     Roundabout
                                                                                                      Roundabout
                                                                                                      Roundabout
                                                                                                    Roundabout
                                                                                                     Roundabout
                                                                                                     Roundabout
                                                                                                 Roundabout
                                                                                                        Roundabout
                                                                                                         Roundabout
                                                                                                         Roundabout
                                                                                                        Roundabout
                                                                                                     Roundabout
                                                                                                   Roundabout
                                                                                                    Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                    Roundabout
                                                                                                     Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                     Roundabout
                                                                                                   Roundabout
                                                                                                   Roundabout
                                                                                                     Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                     Roundabout
                                                                                                        Roundabout
                                                                                                        Roundabout
                                                                                                    Roundabout
                                                                                                        Roundabout
                                                                                                        Roundabout
                                                                                                      Roundabout
                                                                                                      Roundabout
                                                                                                   Roundabout
                                                                                                  Roundabout
                                                                                                 Roundabout
                                                                                                     Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                     Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                        Roundabout
                                                                                                       Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                        Roundabout
                                                                                                        Roundabout
                                                                                                    Roundabout
                                                                                                       Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                       Roundabout
                                                                                                      Roundabout
                                                                                                       Roundabout
                                                                                                       Roundabout
                                                                                                       Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                       Roundabout
                                                                                                     Roundabout
                                                                                                     Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                     Roundabout
                                                                                                    Roundabout
                                                                                                Roundabout
                                                                                                  Roundabout
                                                                                                  Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                  Roundabout
                                                                                      Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                    Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                               Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                       Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                    Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                  Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                      Turbo−roundabout Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                  Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                      Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                    Roundabout
                                                                                            Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                   Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                       Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                       Roundabout
                                                                                                       Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                       Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                 Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                       Roundabout
                                                                                                    Roundabout
                                                                                                      Roundabout
                                                                                                      Roundabout
                                                                                                       Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                       Roundabout
                                                                                           Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                 RoundaboutR oundabout
                                                                              Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                        Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                            Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                      Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                   Roundabout
                                                                                              Roundabout
                                                                                               Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                               Roundabout
                                                                                                      Roundabout
                                                                                                    Roundabout
                                                                                                Roundabout
                                                                                                      Roundabout
                                                                                                     Roundabout
                                                                                                 Roundabout
                                                                                                     Roundabout
                                                                                                      Roundabout
                                                                                                    Roundabout
                                                                                                      Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                      Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                     Roundabout
                                                                                                     Roundabout
                                                                                                      Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                      Roundabout
                                                                                                 Roundabout
                                                                                                    Roundabout
                                                                                                    Roundabout
                                                                                                      Roundabout
                                                                                                  Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                  Roundabout
                                                                                                      Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                      Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                               Roundabout
                                                                                                       Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                  Roundabout
                                                                                                    Roundabout
                                                                                                        Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                        Roundabout
                                                                                                   Roundabout
                                                                                                        Roundabout
                                                                                                 Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                         Roundabout
                                                                                                    Roundabout
                                                                                                       Roundabout
                                                                                                      Roundabout
                                                                                                Roundabout
                                                                                                    Roundabout
                                                                                                    Roundabout
                                                                                                      Roundabout
                                                                                                    Roundabout
                                                                                    RoundaboutRoundabout
                                                                                                     Roundabout
                                                                                                     Roundabout
                                                                                                       Roundabout
                                                                                                       Roundabout
                                                                                                        Roundabout
                                                                                                        Roundabout
                                                                                                       Roundabout
                                                                                                    Roundabout
                                                                                                    Roundabout
                                                                                              Roundabout
                                                                                                 Roundabout
                                                                                                      Roundabout
                                                                                                       Roundabout
                                                                                                   Roundabout
                                                                                                       Roundabout
                                                                                                        Roundabout
                                                                                                        Roundabout
                                                                                                        Roundabout
                                                                                                      Roundabout
                                                                                                         Roundabout
                                                                                                         Roundabout
                                                                                                       Roundabout
                                                                                                        Roundabout
                                                                                                       Roundabout
                                                                                                      Roundabout
                                                                                                    Roundabout
                                                                                                Roundabout
                                                                                                       Roundabout
                                                                                                      Roundabout
                                                                                                        Roundabout
                                                                                                        Roundabout
                                                                                                         Roundabout
                                                                                                        Roundabout
                                                                                                      Roundabout
                                                                                             Roundabout
                                                                                                     Roundabout
                                                                                                     Roundabout
                                                                                                  Roundabout
                                                                                                        Roundabout
                                                                                                       Roundabout
                                                                                                         Roundabout
                                                                                                        Roundabout
                                                                   Roundabout                          Roundabout
                                                                                    Roundabout      Roundabout
                                                                                               Roundabout
                                                                                       RoundaboutRoundabout
                                                                                           Roundabout
                                                                                           Roundabout   Roundabout
                                                                                                        Roundabout
                                                                                                  Roundabout
                                                                                         Roundabout   Roundabout
                                                                                                      Roundabout
                                                                                                Roundabout
                                                                                                      Roundabout
                                                                                                  Roundabout
                                                                                            Roundabout Roundabout
                                                                                                       Roundabout
                                                                                                       Roundabout
                                                                                               Roundabout
                                                                                         Roundabout
                                                                                         Roundabout
                                                                                    Roundabout       Roundabout
                                                                                            Roundabout
                                                                                                     Roundabout
                                                                                                     Roundabout
                                                                                               Roundabout
                                                                                                Roundabout
                                                                                                  Roundabout
                                                                                                         Roundabout
                                                                                                     Roundabout
                                                                                                     Roundabout
                                                                                                  Roundabout
                                                                                                  Roundabout
                                                                                              Roundabout
                                                                                                       Roundabout
                                                                                                      Roundabout
                                                                                                       Turbo−roundabout
                                                                                                       Roundabout
                                                                                                      Roundabout
                                                                                                        Roundabout
                                                                                                      Roundabout
                                                                                                   Roundabout
                                                                                                    Roundabout
                                                                                               Roundabout
                                                                                                     Roundabout
                                                                                                     Roundabout
                                                                                                Roundabout
                                                                                                        Roundabout
                                                                                                        Roundabout
                                                                                                      Roundabout
                                                                                                  Roundabout
                                                                                                      Roundabout
                                                                                                Roundabout
                                                                                                Roundabout
                                                                           Roundabout                   Roundabout
                                                                                                        Roundabout
                                                                                                       Roundabout
                                                                                                     Roundabout
                                                                                                       Roundabout
                                                                                                     Roundabout
                                                                                                     Roundabout
                                                                                                       Roundabout
                                                                                                 Roundabout
                                                                                                  Roundabout
                                                                                                  Roundabout
                                                                                                  Roundabout
                                                                                                       Roundabout
                                                                                                     Roundabout
                                                                                               Roundabout




             20            15               10               5             0
    Figure 18: Dendrogram of cluster analysis of ﬁrst two principal components.


    Figure 19 shows a new scatter plot for DST and SDT. We used centroids to
compare the two intersections given data dispersion, considering that conﬂicts of
the turbo-roundabout belong to cluster 2. Variables related to time presented safer
values for the turbo-roundabout, while deceleration and speed variables presented
safer values for the roundabout, as stated in the ﬁrst cluster analysis.
   According to McDowell et al. (1983), Sayed and Zein (1999), Archer and
Kosonen (2000), Archer (2005), Gettman et al. (2008) and Habtemichael and De
Picado Santos (2014), high values of surrogate safety measures related to speed
and deceleration (highly negative) indicate high severity levels of expected crashes,
as opposed to variables related to time. The foregoing validates the ﬁndings on
road safety performance for the two types of roundabouts.




                     Revista Colombiana de Estadística - Applied Statistics 44 (2021) 91–121

114                                       Lenin Bulla-Cruz, Liliana Lyons & Enrique Darghan

                                                                                                    Cluster
       1515                                                                                            1
                                                                     Centroids’ coordinates
                                                                                                       2
                                                                   Cluster   DST       SDT
       1212                                                          1        2.79     3.71         Centroid
                                                                     2        8.29     6.13           Cluster 1
                                                                                                      Cluster 2
        99                                                                                             Conglomerado
                                                                                                       Conglomerado
                                                                                                          11
 SDT
 SDT



        66                                                                                                22
                                                                                                           Centroides
                                                                                                          Centroides
        33

        00

       -3-3
              -3-3          11           55            99            13
                                                                    13                         17
                                                                                              17
                                                DST
                                               DST

                     Figure 19: Scatter plot with new variables DST and SDT.



3.6. Discriminant Function Analysis
    Scatter plot in Figure 19 allowed observing that exists a linear separation
between clusters. We developed a discriminant function analysis to verify and
describe if there are signiﬁcant diﬀerences between the clusters. In addition,
from such discriminant function we established a linear combination that allows
classifying new traﬃc conﬂicts. The discriminant function obtained, Equation 1,
was statistically signiﬁcant (p-value = 0.00001), with a conﬁdence level of 95% and
a 98.56% of correctly classiﬁed cases, where D is the discriminant score for each
observation classiﬁcation. The discriminant function is the linear combination of
the p variables that form the data set such that the distance between the two
groups of vectors of means is maximized (López, 2011).

                       D = −3.03504 + 0.652558 · DST + 0.771818 · SDT                                             (1)

    In the ﬁrst cluster analysis, 67% of the conﬂicts at the turbo-roundabout
belonged to cluster 2 while, in the second cluster analysis, 88% of the conﬂicts
belonged to cluster 2. This means that we achieved a better classiﬁcation of
conﬂicts using the ﬁrst two principal components in the second cluster analysis.
After the above, we used the ﬁrst two principal components for obtaining
the discriminant linear function, that achieved a 98.56% of correctly classiﬁed
cases. We consider that the high percentage of cases classiﬁed correctly by the
discriminant function is due to the good classiﬁcation achieved in the second
cluster analysis using the ﬁrst two principal components, validating the statistical
approach proposed.




                           Revista Colombiana de Estadística - Applied Statistics 44 (2021) 91–121

Multivariate Safety Assessment of Roundabouts                                          115

4. Conclusions

    We developed a case study to validate the use of microsimulation of traﬃc
conﬂicts and multivariate assessment of surrogate safety measures. We obtained
surrogate measures of safety from VISSIM models and SSAM for evaluating
and comparing road safety performance of two diﬀerent roundabouts types. We
estimated a critical TTCmin = 1.37 s; to date there are no previous references for
measuring this parameter in Bogotá city. We consider that more local research
is needed to calibrate the diﬀerent parameters for using the conﬂicts technique
correctly. Based on the critical TTCmin , the turbo-roundabout presented a total
number of conﬂicts 72% lower than the roundabout, conﬁrming safety beneﬁts of
this novel design.
    Polynomial regressions allowed verifying the validity and consistency of the
surrogate measures obtained, even in conditions of aggressive driver behavior.
Results obtained through univariate analysis, linear regressions and multivariate
cluster analysis are consistent for comparing such surrogate measures. In general,
we observed safer operation at the turbo-roundabout than at the roundabout, but
the former registered higher speeds of approach to conﬂict point, as we conﬁrmed
by the statistical analysis presented.
    Multivariate analysis of surrogate measures proved to be a helpful tool for
comparing diﬀerent intersection alternatives, in terms of road safety. In order
to facilitate the interpretation, it is possible to reduce the number of variables
using PCA without relevant loss of information. The cumulative variance of the
ﬁrst two components was 87.72%, suggesting that is advisable to use the ﬁrst two
components with low loss of information. This is also validated by the eigenvalues
of ﬁrst (15.80), second (9.09) and third components (1.98). Moreover, we reached
similar conclusions about safety when working with the original units of the
surrogate measures. These multivariate statistical techniques allow recognizing the
severity of the events at each type of intersection based on surrogate measures. The
dendrogram in Figure 18 conﬁrmed that most of conﬂicts at the turbo-roundabout
belong to cluster 2, as we indicated in Figure 15, revealing low loss of information
when classifying conﬂicts based on new variables DST and SDT. Through the
developed methodology it is possible to estimate the inﬂuence of diﬀerent traﬃc
control mechanisms and their relationship with the users’ behavior.
     Scope of traﬃc simulation on the study of road safety is broad. Regarding
the evaluated intersections, this research concludes that it is necessary to conduct
studies at diﬀerent periods of the day, both in vehicular congestion and low demand
conditions. The above is suggested to enlarge the ﬁeld of analysis and knowledge
of traﬃc conﬂicts. Likewise, it is necessary to investigate the interaction between
pedestrian, bicycle, vehicle and infrastructure using traﬃc conﬂicts and surrogate
safety measures, based on simulation models and multivariate statistical methods.
It is equally important to clarify that there are tools for the analysis of trajectories
of road users on video, in development, which allow estimating the severity of ﬁeld
conﬂicts. We are currently entering this ﬁeld with the purpose of improving the
accuracy of our models in VISSIM.

                    Revista Colombiana de Estadística - Applied Statistics 44 (2021) 91–121

116                                 Lenin Bulla-Cruz, Liliana Lyons & Enrique Darghan


Acknowledgements
    The authors thank to the Universidad Nacional de Colombia and the
Administrative Department of Science, Technology and Innovation of Colombia
(Colciencias) in the call 617/2013, for their support during the performing of this
research.
            [                                                                ]
                Received: September 2019 — Accepted: December 2020


References
Archer, J. (2005), Methods for the Assessment and Prediction of Traﬃc Safety at Urban Intersections and their Application in Micro-simulation Modelling, PhD thesis, Royal institute of technology. https://www.divaportal.org/smash/get/diva2:7295/FULLTEXT01.pdf
Archer, J. and Kosonen, I. (2000), The potential of Micro-Simulation Modelling in Relation to Traﬃc Safety Assessment, in ‘ESS Conference Proceedings’, Centre for Traﬃc Simulation Research (CTR), Hamburg, p. 6. https://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/versions?doi=10.1.1.577.9626
Balado, J., Díaz-Vilariño, L., Arias, P. and Novo, A. (2019), ‘A safety analysis of roundabouts and turbo roundabouts based on petri nets’, Traﬃc Injury Prevention 20(4), 400–405. 10.1080/15389588.2019.1594208
Barajas, F. H. and Morales, J. C. C. (2009), ‘Comparison for three classiﬁcation techniques’, Revista Colombiana de Estadística 32(2), 247–265. https://revistas.unal.edu.co/index.php/estad/article/view/29771/30019
Brown, G., Chau, A., DeCastilho, B. and Navin, F. (1984), Traﬃc conﬂict procedure and validation for road safety program. On behalf of the Insurance Corporation of the Province of British Columbia, Technical report, University of British Columbia, Vancouver. https://library.swov.nl/action/front/cardweb?id=39893
Bulla-Cruz, L. A. and Castro, W. (2011), Analysis and comparison between two-lane roundabouts and turbo roundabouts based on a road safety audit methodology and microsimulation: a case study in urban area, in ‘3rd International Conference on Road Safety and Simulation’, Purdue University & Transportation Research Board, Indianapolis, p. 12. http://onlinepubs.trb.org/onlinepubs/conferences/2011/RSS/2/Bulla,L.pdf
Bulla-Cruz, L. A., Laureshyn, A. and Lyons, L. (2020), ‘Event-based road safety assessment: A novel approach towards risk microsimulation in roundabouts’, Measurement 165, 1–13. 10.1016/j.measurement.2020.108192
Bulla-Cruz, L. A. and Lyons, L. (2020), Estado del arte en la evaluación de la seguridad vial por medio de conﬂictos de tráﬁco: aplicación al estudio de caso de una glorieta en Bogotá, in Dirección Nacional Simit, ed., ‘Transitemos 2018’, 5 edn, Federación Colombiana de Municipios, Bogotá, chapter 1, pp. 10–26. https://www.simit.org.co/estadisticas
Caﬁso, S., Graziano, A. D., Cava, G. L. and Pappalardo, G. (2013), ‘Cost-eﬀectiveness Evaluation of Diﬀerent Safety Interventions Strategies on Two-Lane Rural Highways’, 4th International Symposium on Highway Geometric Design p. 14. https://trid.trb.org/view.aspx?id=1100630
Campisi, T., Tesoriere, G. and Canale, A. (2018), ‘The variability of Level Of Service and Surrogate Safety Assessment of urban turbo - roundabout with BRT system’, Journal of Multidisciplinary Engineer- ing Science and Technology 5(10), 8861–8869. http://www.jmest.org/wp-content/uploads/JMESTN42352690.pdf
Dowling, R., Skabardonis, A. and Alexiadis, V. (2004), ‘Traﬃc Analysis Toolbox Volume III : Guidelines for Applying Traﬃc Microsimulation Modeling Software’, Rep. No. FHWA-HRT-04-U.S. DOT, Federal Highway Administration, Washington, D.C III(July), 146. https://ops.fhwa.dot.gov/traﬃcanalysistools/tat_vol3/vol3_guidelines.pdf
Elhassy, Z., Abou-Senna, H., Shaaban, K. and Radwan, E. (2020), ‘The implications of converting a high-volume multilane roundabout into a turbo roundabout’, Journal of Advanced Transportation 2020(Article ID 5472806), 12. 10.1155/2020/5472806
Everitt, B. S., Landau, S., Leese, M. and Stahl, D. (2011), Cluster analysis: Fifth edition, 5 edn, Wiley, London.
Fortuijn, L. G. H. (2009), ‘Turbo Roundabouts: Design Principles and Safety Performance’, Transportation research record 2096(1), 16–24. 10.3141/2096-03
Galili, T. (2015), ‘dendextend: An R package for visualizing, adjusting and comparing trees of hierarchical clustering’, Bioinformatics 31(22), 3718–3720. 10.1093/bioinformatics/btv428
Gallelli, V. and Vaiana, R. (2019), ‘Safety improvements by converting a standard roundabout with unbalanced ﬂow distribution into an egg turbo roundabout: Simulation approach to a case study’, Sustainability 11(2), 466. 10.3390/su11020466
Gettman, D. and Head, L. (2003), Surrogate safety measures from traﬃc simulation models, in ‘Statistical Methods and Modeling and Safety Data, Analysis, and Evaluation: Safety and Human Performance’, Transportation Research Record, U. S. Department of Transportation. Federal Highway Administration, pp. 104–115. http://www.fhwa.dot.gov/publications/research/safety/03050/03050.pdf
Gettman, D., Pu, L., Sayed, T. and Shelby, S. (2008), Surrogate Safety Assessment Model and Validation: Final Report, Technical report, FHWA, McLean, VA. http://www.fhwa.dot.gov/publications/research/safety/08051/08051.pdf
Habtemichael, F. G. and De Picado Santos, L. (2014), ‘Crash risk evaluation of aggressive driving on motorways: Microscopic traﬃc simulation approach’, Transportation Research Part F: Traﬃc Psychology and Behaviour . 10.1016/j.trf.2013.12.022
Hatami, H. and Aghayan, I. (2017), ‘Traﬃc eﬃciency evaluation of elliptical roundabout compared with modern and turbo roundabouts considering traﬃc signal control’, Promet Traﬃc&Transportation 29(1), 1–11. 10.7307/ptt.v29i1.2053
Hayward, J. C. (1972), ‘Near-miss determination through use of a scale of danger’, Highway Research Record 1(384), 24–34. http://onlinepubs.trb.org/Onlinepubs/hrr/1972/384/384-004.pdf
Huang, F., Liu, P., Yu, H. and Wang, W. (2013), ‘Identifying if VISSIM simulation model and SSAM provide reasonable estimates for ﬁeld measured traﬃc conﬂicts at signalized intersections’, Accident Analysis and Prevention 50, 1014–1024. 10.1016/j.aap.2012.08.018
Hydén, C. (1987), ‘The Development of a Method for Traﬃc Safety Evaluation: the Swedish Traﬃc Conﬂict Technique’.
Johnson, R. A. and Wichern, D. W. (2007), Applied Multivariate Statistical Analysis, Vol. 47, 6 edn, Pearson Prentice Hall, New Jersey. http://pubs.amstat.org/doi/abs/10.1198/tech.2005.s319
Johnsson, C., Laureshyn, A. and De Ceunynck, T. (2018), ‘In search of surrogate safety indicators for vulnerable road users: a review of surrogate safety indicators’. 10.1080/01441647.2018.1442888
Khasawneh, M. A. and Alsaleh, N. M. (2018), ‘Turbo Roundabout Usage in Lieu of Conventional Roundabouts for the Jordanian Traﬃc Conditions’, International Journal of Civil Engineering 16, 1725–1738. 10.1007/s40999-018-0330-z
Koorey, G., Carpenter, M. and Appleton, I. (2003), Safety Audits of Existing Roads Database, Technical report, Opus International Consultants Ltd, Central Laboratories, Lower Hutt, Christchurch. https://www.transportationgroup.nz/papers/2003/06_Glen_Koorey_Database.pdf
Kraay, J. H., Horst, A. R. A., Der, V. and Oppe, S. (2013), Manual conﬂict observation technique DOCTOR, Technical report, Foundation Road safety for all, Voorburg. https://repository.tudelft.nl/view/tno/uuid%3Aedbed3f6-5aab-453d-bb53-d237f6abbe3b
Laureshyn, A., De Ceunynck, T., Karlsson, C., Svensson, Å. and Daniels, S. (2017), ‘In search of the severity dimension of traﬃc events: Extended Delta-V as a traﬃc conﬂict indicator’, Accident Analysis and Prevention 98, 46–56. 10.1016/j.aap.2016.09.026
Laureshyn, A. and Varhelyi, A. (2018), The Swedish Traﬃc Conﬂict technique:   observer’s manual, Technical report, Transport & Roads, Department of Technology & Society, Faculty of Engineering, LTH, Lund University, Lund. http://www.tft.lth.se/ﬁleadmin/tft/images/Update_2018/Swedish_TCT_Manual.pdf
Liu, Q., Deng, J., Shen, Y., Wang, W., Zhang, Z. and Lu, L. (2020), ‘Safety and eﬃciency analysis of turbo roundabout with simulations based on the lujiazui roundabout in Shanghai’, Sustainability 12(7479), 16. 10.3390/su12187479
López, F. (2011), ‘Wherein are shown some results of autorship attribution to cervantes’ work’, Revista Colombiana de Estadistica 34(1), 15–37. https://revistas.unal.edu.co/index.php/estad/article/view/29882/30103
Mauro, R., Cattani, M. and Guerrieri, M. (2015), ‘Evaluation of the safety performance of turbo roundabouts by means of a potential accident rate model’, The Baltic Journal of Road and Bridge Engineering 10(1), 28–38. 10.3846/bjrbe.2015.04
McDowell, M. R. C., Wennell, J., Storr, P. A. and Darzentas, J. (1983), Gap acceptance and traﬃc conﬂict simulation as a measure of risk, Technical report, Transport and Road Research Laboratory, Berkshire, England. https://trid.trb.org/view.aspx?id=198501
Meister, M. and Koorey, G. (2003), Corridor Safety Performance Measures, in ‘Bay Roads Exposed Conference’, Paper for the Bay Roads Exposed Conference, Opus International Consultants, Ltd., and Opus Central Labs., Rotorua, p. 7. http://www.wbopdc.govt.nz/NR/rdonlyres/7286D592-7B59-4278-8EAF-B65E252B45CE/0/GlenKoorey.pdf
Milligan, G. W. and Cooper, M. C. (1988), ‘A study of standardization of variables in cluster analysis’, Journal of Classiﬁcation 5(2), 181–204. 10.1007/BF01897163%0A
Ministerio de Transporte - INVÍAS (2008), Manual de diseño geométrico de carreteras, INVIAS, Bogotá. https://www.invias.gov.co/index.php/archivo-y-documentos?task=doc_download&gid=985
Moore, M. K. (2013), Sex Estimation and Assessment, in ‘Research Methods in Human Skeletal Biology’, Elsevier Inc., pp. 91–116. 10.1016/B978-0-12-385189-5.00004-2
Pardo, C. E. and del Campo, P. C. (2007), ‘Combination of factorial methods and cluster analysis in R: The package factoclass’, Revista Colombiana de Estadistica 30(2), 231–245.
Parker, M. R. and Zegeer, C. V. (1989), Traﬃc conﬂict techniques for safety and operation, Technical report, Federal Highway Administration - FHWA, McLean, Virginia. Publication No. FHWA-IP-88-027. https://www.fhwa.dot.gov/publications/research/safety/88027/88027.pdf
Pérez, R. A., Lera, L. and Boquet, A. (2006), ‘Double principal components analysis for categorical data and its application to a migration study’, Revista Colombiana de Estadistica 29(1), 17–34.
PTV AG (2012), VISSIM 5.40 User Manual, PTV Planung Transport Verkehr AG, Karlsruhe.
Pu, L. and Joshi, R. (2008), Surrogate Safety Assessment Model (SSAM): Software User Manual, Technical report, Federal Highway Administration, McLean, VA. https://www.fhwa.dot.gov/publications/research/safety/08050/
Punj, G. and Stewart, D. W. (1983), ‘Cluster Analysis in Marketing Research: Review and Suggestions for Application’, Journal of Marketing Research 20(2), 134. 10.2307/3151680
R Core Team and contributors Worldwide (2019), ‘The R Stats Package’. https://stat.ethz.ch/R-manual/R-devel/library/stats/html/00Index.html
Revelle, W. (2018), ‘Procedures for Psychological, Psychometric, and Personality Research’. https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/psych/psych.pdf
Sánchez, L. G., Osorio, G. A. and Suárez, J. F. (2008), ‘Introduction to kernel PCA and other spectral methods applied to unsupervised learning’, Revista Colombiana de Estadistica 31(1), 19–40.
Sayed, T. and Zein, S. (1999), ‘Traﬃc conﬂict standards for intersections’, Transportation Planning and Technology 22, 309–323. 10.1080/03081069908717634
Silva, A. B., Vasconcelos, L. and Santos, S. (2014), ‘Moving from Conventional Roundabouts to Turbo-roundabouts’, Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences 111, 137–146. 10.1016/j.sbspro.2014.01.046
Tarko, A., Davis, G., Saunier, N., Sayed, T. and Washington, S. (2009), Surrogate measures of safety, white paper, Technical report, ANB20(3) Subcommittee on Surrogate Measures of Safety, Washington,  D.C. https://www.researchgate.net/publication/245584894_Surrogate_Measures_of_Safety
Torres, A., Torres, F. and Pardillo, J. M. (2010), ‘Risk classiﬁcation model in rural T-form intersections and time to evasion evaluation as surrogate safety measure’, Revista Ingeniería de Construcción 25(3), 353–370. http://www.ricuc.cl/index.php/ric/article/view/TORRES
Vasconcelos, L., Silva, A. B., Seco, Á. M., Fernandes, P. and Coelho, M. C. (2014), ‘Turbo roundabouts: Multicriterion assessment on intersection capacity, safety and emissions’, Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board 2402(1), 28–37. 10.3141/2402-04
Washington, S., Karlaftis, M. and Mannering, F. (2011), Statistical and Econometric Methods for Transportation Data Analysis, 2 edn, CRC Press Company, Boca Raton, FL.
Wei, T., Simko, V., Levy, M., Xie, Y., Jin, Y. and Zemla, J. (2017),    ‘Visualization of    a   Correlation Matrix’. https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/corrplot/corrplot.pdf
Zhou, S., Sun, J., An, X. and Li, K. (2011), ‘The development of a conﬂict hazardous assessment model for evaluating urban intersection safety’, Transport 26(2), 216–223. 10.3846/16484142.2011.589494
