REGIONAL FLOW ANALYSIS FOR THE VALLE DEL CAUCA REGIÓN IN COLOMBIA
ABSTRACT. Flow frequency analysisof high and low flows is carry out by using the regional Probability Weighted Moments (PWM) algorithm. The distributions fitted to the región are: General extreme valué (GEV), Wakeby, Extreme value type 1 (EV1) or Gumbel and Weibull (two or three parameters) distributions. In order to select the distribution appropite for each series four test of goodness of fit were carry out, manely, chi square, 'DMAX' goodness of fit, probability plot criteria and a graphical test base on montecarlo simulation. The selection of the distribution is made to depend on the performaate of the distributions under tests ovet all test. The distributions selected for annual máximum flow series is the EV1 distribution while the GEV distribution is selected for the annual mínimum flow series.

   INTRODUCTION

   General iafonuation

   Colombia is located on the Equator in the North-west comer of South America,

approximately between 4° 15 ' South latitude amd 12° 20 ' North latitudt and between

66" 5 0 ' and 79" 2 ' West longitude.

   The Cauca river is the main rirer drainage basin of the study región, which from

am economic point of view is the second most iraportant river in the cointry. It raises

in the Andes mountain range of Southern Colombia and flows Northwards into the

Atlantic Ocean. The study región is crossed from South to North bj the Western

mountain range, with a meam altitude of 2000 m above msl. This mountain ramge

                                             U

12                       C, A. González, Pacheco. P. N and Feyen J.


divides the water which drains to the Pacific ocean, and that which drains Eastwaurds

to the Cauca river at 950m above mis approximately. Parallel to that range and to

the East of it is the Central mountain range with a mean altitude of 3000m above

msl approximately, which sepárate the catcbments of Cauca and Magdalena rivers.

     The climate of the región is classified as tropical due to its geographical position.

This type of climate is characterized by its temperature whoee average variation is

not greater than 5° C. However, the climate is strongly influenced by the orography

of the región which afiects the mean temperature according to altitude above mean

sea level. Another factor which ailects the climate together with the orography the

atmoepheric circulation in the form of windt, of the air that is present in the valley

región.

     From the monthly mape of área distribution of rainfall obtüned from Gomales D.

(1984), it is observed that there are two periods of drought and two of rainfall each

year. The drought periods are from January to March and from June to August,

while the rainfall periods are in April amd May and September to December . It is

important to remark that despite the generally similar patterns of all mapa , there

exists significant variation between the düferent stations in regard to the distribution

of raúnfall during the year, reflecting climatic variations in the ragion.



     Stations sdbcted

     Table 1 shows the ñames of the hydrometric stations situated on the Cauca River

and its tributarles which were selected for the study. Table 2 shows the period for

which records were available. Table 2 showi that records were kept from moet of the

tributaiies of the Cauca River, from 1973 up to 1984. However, moet of the stations

    REGIONAL FLOW ANALYSIS FOR THE VALLE DEL CAUCA ...                                13




                     s i l §§i                                     ii!
               >i2                                                 •^ T "7
                                                         >*¿


     I
                S2

               88
                      RS
                                     n           S8                  is      s

          sun                 Ul                          ssisi I

            IJ i l i i l H H l i j f i iilf Ii
         ii               I ñ I 1
                 SiSSS                                   «s
                                                  rfcf




    ü    9
         SUS   RS
                     ^R
                          R
                              88
                              9 í>
                                                    8 8R
                                             RR >•* RR                fe


                          I                              II ií               I
i
                                                                                 ii
                     ]|                  }   i           I     !
                                                                   !
                                                                     1       1

14                   C. A, González, Pacheco. P. N aiid Feyen J.




                                           I




     !!]:




                                           s
     Is.


            • •J                                                   *4-


     í




                                                         9.
     V
               J»»
            *•'

 1!HEM^^^^^^^
                                                                         I

         REGIONAL FLOW ANALYSIS FOR THE VALLE DEL CAUCA ...                            15


on the Cauca River have a longer recording period. As 1985 started to run the

Salvajina dam which aiifecti all the measurements downstream:i of the Cauca River

It was chosen a concurrent period of ten yeatts from 1973 to 1982, being the longest

period for which reUable concurretat Information data are available. Qven the effect

of Sadvajina dam on thefloo<lsand lowflowsof the Cauca River statiocs, the regona!

results obtadned will be usefiü for appUcation in the tributarles of the Cauca river.

   Figure 1 illustrates the hydrometric stations in the región and the measuremenl

Instruments used. The instrunents used are discrete and continuous stage recording



   Compilation of d a t a

   The series of extremes data were obtained from the Regional Corporation of Cauca

River (C.V.C.). The annual máximum (Am) flow series is solely due to rainfall as ir

this región snowmelt is virtuadly absent.

   The soil permeability varies significantly with the variation of soil types. Foi

instamce, it is known from direct observation that the soil type varies from clay to sand

and in some places to stony strata. This variation is not only between catchments

but also it is common to ind this variation within the same catchment. It hat

undoubtedly a big influence on the catchment response to the radnfall isput and henee

on the charauiteristics of the series. However, the avaúlable geological Information ií

still scattered and requires a further effort to assemble it into a more uieful form tha<

cam be incorporated into a hydrological study.

    In addition, the Information on precipitation in the región, is presented in a general

form to cover the whole región, averaging the rainfall patterns in the are» which camnol

be easily associated with any of the components catchments.

16   C. A. González, Pacheco. P. N and Feyen J.

         REGIONAL FLOW ANALYSIS FOR THE VALLE DEL CAUCA ...                          17




   The minimum annual flows occurs between August and October. This cam be

explained by the fact that rivers are in recession since the beginning of the preceding

dry period in June and because the period from September to October is usuaJly too

small to reserve these recession.

   Tables 3 and 4 show the annuaü máximum and minimum flow series for equad

concurrent lengtfas of record, for the thirty stations selected.



   Preliminary Analyses

   Basic statistics of the región, such as coefBcients of variation and skewness and

the vttfiations on them, were compared with those of other regions for which studies

have been produoed, e.g. those carry out by Hoeking et ad.,(1985a), King (1985) and

Wallis and Wood (1985). The statistics showed a región more heterogeneous in the

annuad máximum flow series and in the mininmmi flow series.

   Tests of randomness of t h e data

   In flood frequency the basic objective is the analysis of outcomes of real obser-

vations considered as a random sample. For this anadysis, mathematical models are

considered as the most condensed manner of expressing the Information about random

variables. The dement of randomness is essential to the development of a statistical

argument; in fact, it is the element that adlows delineation of a population or coUective

from a descriptioi of which we cam make probabilistic conchisions. Since hydrological

situations can nei^er be very well described, the question oí independence, as that of

randomness, is always problematicad.

    In order to check randomness to valídate the use of the statistical inferences pro-

18                C. A. González, Pacheco. P. N and Fey«n J.




         8       88          8
                                                %l

     i
         88       888? l         8.
                                        *l         88
                                                        8   g'
                                                                    3.)


         88           88 8                   ¡^8
         l^i          IS S                                  8::e
                 88    8     8                          9
         í
             8               8                     8 8             8 !8
                                      8 fe" 8               i

    REGIONAL FLOW ANALYSIS FOR THE VALLE DEL CAUCA ..                                                 19




                    8       8           8                                8                  888.

                                    8       8                                                fkR 8

    §                           8                    8     8      8j8-        ^8.
                8«                                                e

            8 8                     8       8.       8.            8               SI 8.          8


            §8. 8 _8
            Sis
                lít             I*8 8                                              98             R


        «i                  8888                               S^^8. 8.

                                8           %8. ^ 8 ,                                      }^8    8

                8               888         8 9(8 8. }^^8.                     8                  8
    §                                                                                  15-
    &       8                               5^?      $18                           88            R8
        S

    §                           88 8                      88                       88             8



        I I                                 i                  i il ti                           fI
                                                                   I

                        i
                                                 f        I                   1 íi
j
4                                                                         a        «

20                     C. A. González, Pacheco. P. N and Feyen J.


tedures it was applied the number of turning points test. As pointed out by NERC

(1975), the asiumption of randomness can not be preved but may be disproved if fea-

tures of non-randomness aire found in the series. In a ramdom sequence the total num-

ber of turning points is approximately Notmally distributed (Yule and Kendall.,1950),

with mean 2íí^:il and variance ^^^^~'^^ Furthermore, it was carry out the serial

correlation coefllcient to check the effect of persistence in the series amd its aim was

to investígate the degree to which the dischaurge in one yeatf is dependent upon the

magnitude of the dischairge in the preceding year. The lag one seriad correlation has

been taken as a measure persistence. It is defíned as:


                             7 7 ^ \ Y:\Xi - X)(Xi - X)]
                         Ki_           r-R     IT



where Ri is Ihe serial correlation coefficient at lag one and Xi is the t'*''valué in the

series. For a ramdom sequence the valué Ri should be cióse to zero and it varies

from zero only by samplmg variation. According to Clarke (1973), Ri is normally

distributed with mean r^éfi *>*<1 variance \^Z\]i • The above two statistical distri-

bution free tests, naunely, turning points and serial correlation coefficient imphe that

they cain be used whatever the form of the distribution in the parent population may

be . Such tests have the advantage that their approximate validity is comparatively

easy to verify, and they generally do not require a lot of computation. They are often

less powerful than other standard procedures but the loss of power is usuadly small

and it is moie than compensated for their wider applicability (Keeping.,1966).

         REGIONAL FLOW ANALYSIS FOR THE VALLE DEL CAUCA ...                         21




   Regionaü amalysis



   The hydrologist frequently needs to estímate event magnitude from sites which

are either ungauged or have records of very short duration. Wken only a short

record is avadlable it is not advisable to choose a distribution at-site base on the

sample adone (NERC (1975), Cunnane (1989)), but prior informático about the form

of the distribution e.g. any existing regionaü frequency curve must be used. Usually

attempts are made to use the Information at hand which at first sight is that belonging

to neighbouring gauge catchments. The use of Information belongiig to a particular

región to establish quantiles estimates at a site is called regional aaalysis. By using

this procedure the data belonging to a particular región is assumed ais being derived

firom the same population, so that it is comdined with the prior iiformation into a

single standardized s&mple.

   The regionaü methods are performed in order to reduce the standard error of the

estimate (Benson (1960), Dalrymple (1960)), to reduce the sampling error and, even

for a gauge site, will produce more reliable event estimates than a single station

frequency anadysis, Kite (1977).

   Accurate flood frequency analysis demands some form of regioaaJization, but to

regionalize climatic variables and transform them to get estimates of the extreme

quantiles of streamflow is a approach designed, presumably not by ictent, to maxinúze

the root mean square error of the final quantile estimates (Wallis 1980). Henee, the

use of more than one set of data produces more robustness in the estimation of the

parauneters.

22                        C. A. González, Pacheco, P. N and Feyen J.


     The most generalized scheme of regional analysis evolves the determination of

a dimensionless flood or low flow frequency relationship, the estimation of a mean

annual minimum or máximum flow series either from a record oí data or from an

equation linking it to cstchment characteristics and the estimation of the quantile

by using the relationship i =: Qr , where Qr is the quantile varíate, while Q is the

estimate at site and ^ is the mean annual minimum or máximum flow (González

(1989)).

     Diiferent regionalization methods are avadlable (Dalrymple 1960, NERC 1975, U.S.

Water Resources Councfl 1977, WalUs 1980), The regional PWM was chosen in this

study. WadUs (1980), isdicated that this procedure may be found usefiíl in those

situations, where the records are short as this case. Besides, if the data in the región

are indeed 'homogeneout 'or 'quasy-homogeneous ', then the above procedure can be

expected to result in quutíie estimates that are better than the comparable at-site

estimate for all sites.

     The regional PWM technique is particularly robust when the available record

samples are either of very short length, highly kurtotic or skewed (Greenwood et

al.,(1979), Greis and Wood (1981). Robustness studies done through Montecairlo sim-

ulation have shown the better performance of this methodology over other regionad

frequency algorithms (Lettenmaier and Potter (1985), Hosking et al., (1985a,b) and,

Walüs and Wood(1985)).



     Figure 2 show the piocedure to obtain the original PWM as suggested by Walüs

(1980).

         REGIONAL FLOW ANALYSIS FOR THE VALLE DEL CAUCA ...                               23


   Figure 2. P W M regional Method as proposed by Widlis (1980)


                                Sita.                                      Sil.t

                '1,1    •*i,J           ^l.N               n.l     1^1,a           n,N
                 «a,i   Xl.t            *J,N               V,,,    ''a.a           y^.N


                *..!    •*..a           *«.N
                                                     •
                                                         . *^».'   >'..a           V N

                                SUtt                                       Situ
                                                          1.0       1.0             1.0
                «0,1    *Í0,3
                                                         «1,1      *«. a
        o««             "l.J            «l.N             Mo!i      Wo-;,           "o,N
       PWMt
                                                                                   "k,N
                •^k.i
                                                     ,
                                               Mo
                                        i ^    M,



                                               MI,




pfd P a r a m e t e r Estimation

   To estimate the patrameters of the pdf's used, the regionad PWM was applied,

The PWM method was introduced by Greenwood et al.,(1979). It is useful for distri-

butions which can be expressed in inverse form (X=X(F)), where F is the cimiulative

distribution function. It leads to simple and unbiassed estimators (Cuimane., 1985).

The PWM's atfe defíned as:


                                                     1

                    Mi ,-,» = E[X'F'{1 - F)"] = I X'F'il - F)''dF


Where l,j,k are real numbers and F = F(st) = P{X < x). It is observed that

the above expression is a more generad expression than conventional moments. If

j = fc = O, Mi,o,o represents the moment about the origin of ordei 1.

    As it is possible to exprese the Gumbei, Wakeby, GEV, and WeibuU distributions

in inverse form, they were fitted by using the PWM method.

24                      C. A. González, Pacheco. P. N and Feyen J.




     Fitting t h e distributions by P W M .

     In the apphcation of the PWM method of parauneter estimation to the diíFereat dis-

tributions applied , the moment used varies. While for the GEV distribution , Hosking

et al., (1985b) obtained the parameters by using the moment Mi j,o>Greenwood et

al., (1979) used the expression Mio.t, to estimate the parameters of the WeibuU,

Gumbei, Generalized lambda, Logistic, Wakeby amd Kappa distributions.

     Landwehr et al., (1979 b, c), found that PWM algorithm performs well for the

Wadteby distributions using moderately biased estimate of A/io.i given as:



                              Mi,o,t = - ^ ^ A ' i ( l - F í ) *
                                             i= l


Where Pj denotes the •** plotting position calculated as: P, = ('~^^^), j is the rank

and N the sample size.

     The same biased estimator wasutiUzed by Landwehr et al ., (1979a) to estimate

the Gumbei parameters. Similarly, Hoeking et al., (1979a, b) also applied the samie

estimator in the determination of the GEV parameters. In order to obtain the WeibuU

parameters the same estimator was implemented in this study.



     Details of the derivation procedure and parameter estimates in the term of PWM

cam be found in Greenwood et al., (1979), Landwehr et al., (1979a,b,c), Hosking et al.,

(1985a,b). The parameters of the regional distributions were obtídned by regionally

averaging PWM's, as outlined in Fig.2. Table 5 shows the cumulative distribution

functions for the different distributions apphed in this study and the valúes of the

         REGIONAL FLOW ANALYSIS FOR THE VALLE DEL CAUCA                                                                                                25


pairameters for the distributions fitted in the región for low flows and AM flow series.



    Table 5. Parameter estimated for t h e pdf's used.




                              CB«al*t(«« Dli«riksli*S

        DUtribail»            r«Brti»   cor
                                                              .                  -          1            >                  .        1                 1
                                                        Maa       Mta    Maa         Mil        Mu           Hia     ll>»       w»       M M    MU



         «VI
                              ".[—{-(H*)}]              «••       O-TM   oa?         • 41       0            •

         • « a «tal

                                                        O.M       OTa    0.M         «.*a       aaa          •«.M

         osv                   1 #e


                              .-..,{-(«)'}                        a      111         t.ts       S4S          a-ftT

         (a i M > * w n « M



         WslMIl               •-'{-(H*)'}               9Mt       OIM    S.TS«       ».«M       aJM          I M




         Wakafcr                                        »         0      v.Tat       0.a»           tt.OTS   «IM     I4.«»)     4.*T     B.«>   «isa




    Gtoodness of fit test's

     Most of the sludies which have attempted to discriminate between distributions

 in frequency analysis methods have relied at least to some extent on objective good-

 ness of fit Índices, i.e. Benson (1968), Bobee and Robitaille (1975), NERC (1975),

 U.S.W.R.C. and Beable and McKerchar (1982). However, it is acknowledged that

 classical goodnesa of fit Índices such as chi square and Kolmogorov-Smirmov test are

 not suíficiently sensitive or powerful, and they are of littie help in choosing any dis-

 tribution, Benson (1968), Bobee and Robitaille (1975), NERC (1975). Walhs and

26                      C. A. González, Pacheco. P. N and Feyen J.


Wood (1985) pointed out that a goodness of fit test with short record can not provide

unequivocal answers about the uature of the underlyíng distribution or necessary re-

liable guide to the problem of estimating extreme flow quantiles with a maucimum

accuracy, which emphasizes the need for robust estimation techniques.



     Test's used

     There were performed four goodness fit tests, namely, chi square, probabihty plot

criteria (Benson 1968), 'DMAX ' and a graphical tests. In applying the chi square

tests and the probability plot criteria the station yea^ assumption in first made. The

data of each sample is stamdardised by división by the sample mean. The valúes are

pooled together into a single samiple and it is aasumed that this is a rauídom sample

from a single population.



     Probability plot criteria ( P P C )

     The method consisted of evaluating how weUeach regional distribution under test

fitted the whole of the standardized series. The following PPC index was chosen to

estimate the deviations produced between the observed quantile (Q,) and the varíate

valué on the curve at the t*'' plotting position.


                                           N
                              PPC=j'£\Qi-EiQi)\
                                           1=1




E (Qi) depends on both the parameters and form of the distribution under test and

ímplíes that the plotting position or its equivatent on the probability scale is used

(NERC 1975). This involves some compromises because the exact valúes of E{Qi)

         REGIONAL ILOW ANALYSIS FOR THE VALLE DEL CAUCA ...                           27


for the GEV, Wakeby and WeibuU distributions are unknown. However, distribution

free Hazen formula '•''j^*^ , is used here. The Gringorten formula /j^"°¿yA was used

for the EVl distributbn.



   'DMAX ' goodness of fit test.

   This tests developed by Njenga and Cunnane (1985), has a phílosophicad basis

similar to the Kolmogorov-Smirmov test, but in this cases the advamtages of the

Computer are used to make inferences from the regional distribution of the statistics

(skewness coefficient Cs, coefficient of variation Cv, coefficient of kurtosis Ck).

   The statistics generated from a distribution under test are compared with those of

the observed valúes of annual minimum and aimual máximumflowseries. The región

was simulated 100 times by the computer. From the above simulation was obtained

the same number of statistics (Cv,C8 amd Ck) for each station. In each repetition

the statistics belonging to the stations in the simulated región were ramked from

smadlest to largest. The mean in every rank and for each statistics was obtained. The

absolute derivations of the statistics from the average for each ramk and repetition

were computed. The máximum valué for each repetition denoted as 'DMAX' was

selected. Thus, it is obtained a 100 rows vector of 'DMAX 'valúes for each statistics.

Figure 3 shows the procedure.

28                         C. A. González, Pacheco. P. N and Feyen J.




     Figttre 3. adgorithm t o compute t h e ' D M A X ' goodness of fit test



                                                        Genérate samples of size 10
        [ Distribution under teat ]
                                                        for the región of n stations

                                                              rank the valúes for      gample
         Calcúlate statistics Cs, Cv, Ck
                                                          *      each repetition              •
         for each stations in the región
                                                                 and statistici        f^*" ^ ^
                 sites n
              repetitions i                       Cv,         c».           ^«100,•


              averaging                                                    ohtain abaolute
              columns                                                       deviations
                                 mean of ranked statistics J

                                                                obtain Maximun deviation
                                                                 valué DMAXi for each
        . [^«'loo.i — C „ | I   ...   I^l/joo,,
                                      ^Vinn -       Ct,                 repetition

          DMAXi              ,..,..,                    ,           Perform the test wtth the
                             ftt trie Maxtmun valué                      -j- , ,      i_, •
                            \      /-^ntr j - . . i ..•               crttxcal valué om,axn
                              to a GEV distribution                      ,     .,        ,
         DMAX^oo                                                        from the sample

     The máximum deviation between the ranked statistic from the observed series

and their corresponding means obtain in the simulation C», to Cv„ is the goodness of

fit index caUed 'DMAX'. If 'DMAX 'ís greater than the crítica! valué tadcen from the

upper taíl of the fitted distribution obtained with the DMAX simulated valúes, then

the hypothesis that tke series comes from the distribution under test is rejected. The

significance level selected for this study was 5%.



     Graphicad test.

     For each the distributions under test in both sets of seríes (annual máximum and

mínimum), 500 samples of size 10 were generated amd each simulation was ranked in

         REGIONAL FLOW ANALYSIS FOR THE VALLE DEL CAUCA ...                          29


ascending order. Thus each of the order statístis from one to ten have 500 valúes.

   Instead of assuming any distribution for the random variables belonging to each

order statistic, tkey were indívidually ranked in ascending order. From every order

statistics the 12'^ and 488'^ valúes were chosen as tke lower and upper bounds cor-

responding to the middle 95% eonfidence interval for this test. The pair of points so

chosen were plotted agaínst their corresponding plotting position order statistics on

ordinary graph paper. Two sepárate smooth curves were drawn through the points

corresponding to the upper and lower bounds respectively.

   The test conasts of plotting for each valué of order statistics between 1 and 10 the

standardized ranked valúes for each station in the región. The visual íaspection as well

as the number of points outside the bounds helps to obtain the best approximation

for the región.

   Results

   From the persistence and randomness test's applied to the annual mínimum flow

seríes, the station number 30 on Tuluá river was witkdraw from the analysis because

it dísplayed persistence and non-randomness. None of the AM flow series showed

neither persistence ñor non-randomness. As a result the analysis wais carry out with

29 stations for analysis of amnuad minimum flow and 30 stations for AM flow.

    Before any goodness of fit test was carry out the WeibuU three parameters dis-

tribution fitted to the annual mínimum flow seríes was dropped from the amalysis

because its lower bound (p = 0.395) (see Table 5] was greater than          10% of the

290 standardized amnual mínimum flow valúes. In regard to the annuad máximum

flow seríes, it was observed that the valué of the GEV distribution shape paraimeter

(A=0.061) Í8 small and positive whicb corresponds to a EV3 distribution. Hosking et

30                     C. A. González, Pacheco. P. N and Feyen J.


ad., (1985a ), developed a test to see whether the shape parameter X ie zero or not.

The test was carry out and did not reject the hypothesis of A = O at a significance

level of 5%. As a consequence, the GEV distribution was dropped from the analysis,

amd the EVl distribution was the only distribution from the GEV famíly remaíning.



     Table 6. PPC Index applied to t h e probability plot.



               Annual series Distribution                 P P C Index
               M
               i             EVl                          0.21
               n
               i             GEV                          0.24          i
               m
               u             Wakeby                       0.24
               m
                             WeibuU                       0.42
               M
                             EVl                          0.16
               X
               i                 Wakeby                    1.01
               m
               u                 Weíbull(2 parameters)     0.36
               m
                                 Weíbull(3 parameters)     0.29

     Annuiü minimum flows

     The chi-square goodness of ñt test shows the GEV distribution au the only dis-

tribution accepted at 5% level which describes the annuad mínimum flow seríes. In

regard to the chi square índex it ís observed that the EVl and Wadceby distribution

have a similar index, while the WeibuU distribution dísplay a greater valué. The hy-

pothesis that the sample comes from the above distributions was rejected. This result

somehow unexpected since the Wakeby distribution ought to be sufficiently flexible

to fit amy sample well.

         REGIONAL FLOW ANALYSIS FOR THE VALLE DEL CAUCA ...                           31


   Using the 'DMAX 'goodness of fit test. The regional GEV distribution perform

better than the other fitted distributions. The Wakeby amd EVl distributions be-

have similarly in this test. The worst performance was obtained with the WeibuU

distribution. The hypothesis that the statistics Cv,Cs and Ck comes from the GEV

distribution ís accepted, while in the other distributions the hypothesis that the Cv

comes frcsn the distribution under test ís rejected.

   Fíg.4 and Table 6 shows the data with the distribution under test dísplayed in

EVl paper plots. From a visual inspection of the plots and especíally the lower tail of

the distributions, it is observed that the fit in this part of the distribution, the most

important for low flows, is not quite acceptable in any of them. The order of best fit

according to the PPC criteria shown ís : l.)EVl, 2.)GEV, 3.)Wakeby and 4.)WeibuU

distribution.

   The performance of the distributions (see Fig. 5 and Table 7) when ís used the

graphical test has the foUowmg order : l.)EVl,2.)Wakeby, 3.)GEV and 4.)WeibuU

distributbn.

   From the above goodness of fit, it is observed that GEV distribution, followed by

the EVl distribution performed in the most stable way throughout all the tests.

    Lettenmaier (1985), pointed out that two parauneter distributions, as in this case

the EVl distribution, when they are used with an appropriate regíonahzatíon method,

can result in quantile estimates with quite low variabUity but at expenses of consid-

erable bias, and the GEV/PWM appear to yield quantile with low variabUity and

low bias. That ís why it is chosen the regional algorithm GEV/PWM for annual

minimum flow in the región.

32            C. A. González, Patheco. P. N and Feyen .1.




         ai
         <0
         C
         O
         m

         I
         c
         i                           i    I



         a




     •    ^




                                                 !;.>.>>•:

     REGIONAL FLOW ANALYSIS FOR THE VALLE DEL CAUCA ...   33




I
i
c

-a
s
c

I

1
i
•A

34                     C. A. González, Pacheco. P. N and Feyei J.




     Table 7. Number of vadues belonging to the series outside of the proba-

bility range.



           Annual series      Distribution             Number of valúes |
           M
           i                  EVl                      23
           n
           i                  GEV                      29
           m
           u                  Wakeby                   28
           m
                              WeibuU                   31                   1
           M
           a                  EVl                      7
           X
           i                  Wakeby                   9
           m
           u                  Weíbull(2 parameters)     13
           m
                              Weibull(3 paramieters)    9

     Annual máximum flows

     The result for the chi square test shows that EVl distribution is the only one for

which the hypothesis that the AM series comes from the distribution under test ís

accepted, the significance leve] used was 5%.

     The performances of EVl and Wakeby distribution in the DMAX test are simi-

lar. It is accepted the hypothesis that the statistics Cv,Cs amd Ck carne from this

distributions. The WeibuU three parameter distribution followed by the WeibuU two

parameter dístríbatíon obtained the worst performance.

     The probabihty plot test showed that performances of the EVl and Wakeby distri-

butions are similar in the upper taíl of the plot. However, the PPC criteria índícated

a better performance of EVl distribution, followed by the WeibuU three paremieter

        REGIONAL FLOW ANALYSIS FOR THE VALLE DEL CAUCA ...                           35


distribution and the WeibuU two parameter (see Fig.6 and Table 6).

   Fíg.7 together with Table 7, showed again that the EVl and Wakeby distribution

perform in a simUar way in the graphical test foUowed in the same order for the

Weibull three and two parameter distributions.

   From the results, it is observed that when it ís applied to annual máximum flo^

series the EVl distribution performed better that any other distributions. Therefore,

the EVl distributions is choeen for the annual máximum flow series.

   NERC (1975) pointed out that it has not been shown conclusívely that the twc

parameter distribution are inapplicable, moreover the performance of this algorithn

EVl/PWM has shown that quatiles produce low variabihty despite doubts about the

homogeneity of the región. Greis and Wood (1981).



   Conclusions

   The main drawback in the choice of the distributions was that none of the test,

except the probability plot, put emphasis in the lower or upper taíl of the distribution

which are the part of interest in low or high flow studies.

   As was stated by Wallis (1980), theoretícal innovations have not valué for theii

own sake. They are only vaiuable if it cam be proven that the new technique ís íi

some sense superior to other techniques already avadlable and accepted. This resulta

may have valué if it is compared with other techniques appUed in Colombia and

helps towards a procedure of regionad estimates based upon the most update regional

statistical techniques such as the cluster analysis.

    Finally, the distributions chosen were the GEV distribution and EVl distributioi

for amnual mínimum flow and annual máximum flow seríes respectively.


     REGIONAL FLOW ANALYSIS FOR THE VALLE DEL CAUCA ...                                                    37




ca
V

I
I


                                          II
                                          í      <   I   •   I    I       •       F   t       '       ',




•a




I


         I I I I I 1 I I I I I I I 1-^'       ' ' ' ' ' ' * ' ' ' ' ' •           I I I I I I
         ,   i   I   l>   t   •   I   «                       C       •       S   r       f       r




                                                             '*


   REGIONAL FLOW ANALYSIS FOR THE VALLE DEL CAUCA ...                                39

REFERENCES
King, M., (1985). A low FLow frecuency analysis for Irish river M. Se. thesis, University College Galvay, Ireland.
Kite, G.W.,(1977). Frequency and risk analysis in hydrology. Water Resources. Publications, Fort Collins, Colorado. U.S.A.
Lanwehr, J.M., Matalas, N.C. and Wallis, J.R. (1979(a)). Probability weighted moments compared wiih some traditional techniques in estimationing Gumbel parametere and quantiles. Water Resources Research, Vol 15 (5), 1055-1064.
Landwehr, J.M, Matalas, N.C. and Wallis, J.R. (1979 (b-c)). Estimation of parameters and quantiles of Wakeby distribution. Water Resources Reseach, Vol 15 (6), 1361-1379.
Lettenmaier, D.P., (1985). Regionalization in flood frequency analysis: -Is it the answer. Paper pres. at U.S.-China Bilateral symposium or the analysis of extraordinary flood events, Nanjng.
Lettenmaier, D.P., and Potter, K.V., (1985). Testing flood frecuency estimation methods using a regional food generating model. Water Resources Research, VoL21(12), 1903-1914.
NERC, (1975). Flood studies report. National Environment Resources Council, Vol 1-5, 1100 pp.
Njenga, M., (1985). Simulation applied to the inference problem of the underlying distribution of hidrologic random variables . M.Sc. Thesis, University College Galway, Ireland.
U.S.W.R.C. (1977). Guidelines for determining flood flow frequency. Bulletin No. 17A of the Hidtology Committee. Washington.
Wallis, J.R., (1980). Risk and uncertainties in the evaluation of flood events for the desing of hydrologic structures. Keynote addiess at "Seminar on Extreme Hydrological Events-Foods and Droughts "Erice, Italy, 33 pp.
Wallis, J.R. and Wood, E.F. (1985). Relative accuracy of log-Pearson III pro-
cedures. A.S.C.E. Journal of Hydraulic Engineering 111 (7),1043-1056 (See also
discussion and reply, 113(9), 1205-1214, 1987).