Visualizing Partially Ordered Sets for Socioeconomic Analysis,  Visualización de conjuntos ordenados parciales para análisis                           socioeconómicos
University of Milano-Bicocca, Italy, Company SmartStat, Italy
Abstract
In this paper, we develop a visualization process for partial orders derived from considering many numerical indicators on a statistical population. The issue is relevant, particularly in the field of socio-economic evaluation, where explicitly taking into account incomparabilities among individuals proves much more informative than adhering to classical aggregative and compensative approaches, which collapse complexity into unidimensional rankings. We propose a process of visual analysis based on a combination of tools and concepts from partial order theory, multivariate statistics and visual design. We develop the process through a real example, based on data pertaining to regional competitiveness in Europe.
Key words: Partial Order, Hasse Diagrams, Self-Organizing Map, Visualization.
Resumen
En este artículo, se desarrolla un proceso de visualización para órdenes parciales derivados al considerar varios indicadores numéricos de una población estadística. Esto es relevante parcialmente en el área de la evaluación socioedonómica donde se toma en cuenta explicitamente incomparabilidades entre los individuos y resulta ser más informativo que la agregación clásica y compensativa que colapsa la complejidad en rankings unidimensionales. Se propone un proceso de análisis visual basado en la combinación herramientas y conceptos de la teoría de orden parcial, estadítica multivariada y diseño usual. Se desarrollo el proceso a través de un ejemplo real, basado en datos de competitividad regional en Europa
Palabras clave: diagramas Hasse, mapa autoorganizado, orden parcial, visualización.



1. Introduction
    A detailed study on the economic competitiveness of European regions has
been recently published by the Joint Research Centre (Annoni & Dijkstra 2013),
to provide insights into the differences and the similarities of regional economic
performances. A composite indicator, named RCI (Regional Competitiveness In-
dex), has been computed based on a set of 73 elementary indicators, selected as
relevant from a socio-economic point of view1 . The RCI computation proceeds
through a hierarchical process, where elementary indicators are weighted and pro-
gressively aggregated in so-called “pillars”, until a single composite indicator is
obtained. Once RCI is computed, inter-regional comparisons can be made and
a final competitiveness ranking is achieved. This kind of aggregative process is
prototypical of the way economists and social scientists usually address the assess-
ment of multidimensional socio-economic issues, like competitiveness, well-being,
quality-of-life and the like. In fact, multidimensional assessments are very often
designed with the aim to return clear and unambiguous rankings of statistical
units. Common practice shows that this can be achieved only at the cost of los-
ing a great deal of information. Competitiveness, well-being, quality-of-life and
many other similar socio-economic topics are complex, multidimensional, full of
ambiguities, nuances and uncertainties. Turning them into unidimensional rank-
ings is burdensome and not necessarily leads to clearly interpretable results. In
essence, the problem resides in the fact that these issues are truly multidimen-
sional. This is often confirmed by the absence of strong interrelations among
elementary indicators, so that multidimensionality-reducing tools based on cor-
relations (e.g. structural equation models) prove mostly ineffective in achieving
any meaningful synthesis. Likewise, it must be noted that RCI primarily aims at
measuring the level of competitiveness, despite no natural scale against which can
be compared. More properly, competitiveness of a region can be compared to that
of other regions, rather than assessed on an absolute scale. Due to multidimen-
sionality, however, such comparisons generally do not lead to complete rankings
but to partial orderings, since conflicting indicators in regional competitiveness
profiles lead to incomparabilities. The impossibility of obtaining meaningful and
unambiguous rankings is typical of multi-criteria decision problems and the rele-
vance of taking this feature into account has been also noted by Nobel prize Sen,
in his book on inequality (Sen 1992). It is thus very important for social sci-
entists to get acquainted with this kind of data structures, that is, in technical
terms, with partially ordered sets (Barthélemy, Flament & Monjardet 1982). In
fact, one can easily figure out the consequences in policy decisions, when a policy-
  1 Elementary indicators come from many and heterogeneous different sources (Dijkstra, An-

noni & Kozovska 2011). However, all of them are measured on numerical scales.


                                       Revista Colombiana de Estadística 37 (2014) 437–450

Visualizing Partially Ordered Sets for Socioeconomic Analysis                              439

maker looks at regional competitiveness (or well-being, or quality of life. . . ) in
terms of unidimensional rankings, without realizing that different and incompara-
ble competitiveness patterns do exist. Partially ordered sets have their drawbacks
too, in that metric information gets lost. But this issue can be, at least par-
tially, solved by exploiting suitable visualization tools, as shown below (see also
Al-Sharrah (2014), for analogous attempts to introduce metric information in a
partial order context). Generally speaking, the mathematical theory of partially
ordered sets is well-established, but its application to socio-economic problems is
at a beginning stage (Fattore, Bruggemann & Owsiński 2011, Fattore, Maggino
& Greselin 2011, Fattore, Maggino & Colombo 2012). This motivates the present
attempt to develop graphical and software tools devoted to the visualization of par-
tial orders, to incline social scientists towards this way of looking at socio-economic
data. The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we describe the structure
of RCI more deeply and introduce the example used to illustrate the visualization
tool. In Section 3, we present some elements of partial order theory and introduce
Hasse diagrams, the basic visualization tool for partial orders. In Section 4, we
provide some details on Self-Organizing Maps, the tool used to cluster statistical
units prior to visualization. Section 5 develops the visualization tool. Section 6
provides a conclusion.


2. Regional Competitiveness Data
    The Regional Competitiveness Index (RCI) proposed by the Joint Research
Centre in its 2013 Report aims at providing a synthetic measure of the socio-
economic attractiveness of 262 European regions, mainly at NUTS 2 level. To build
RCI, 73 elementary indicators2 are first aggregated into 11 so-called “sub-pillars”;
in turn, these are aggregated into 3 “pillars”, whose final aggregation produces the
RCI index. Each aggregation step is performed through simple weighted means
(see Annoni & Dijkstra (2013) for details). A scheme of the index architecture is
represented in Figure 1.
    The structure of pillars in terms of subpillars is as follows:

   1. Basic pillar. Subpillars: (i) Institutions, (ii) Infrastructure, (iii) Health, (iv)
      Macroeconomic stability, (v) Basic education.

   2. Efficiency pillar. Subpillars: (i) Market Size, (ii) Labour Market Efficiency,
      (iii) Higher Education / Training and Lifelong Training.

   3. Innovation pillar. Subpillars: (i) Innovation, (ii) Business Sophistication,
      (iii) Technological Readiness.

   This paper is not devoted to the analysis of the RCI in itself, so we focus just on
data pertaining to one pillar (the Basic pillar), in order to show the visualization
   2 Some elementary indicators are preliminarily transformed, but the published report does not

contain the details of the procedure. So it is not possible to work out all the computational
details.


                                         Revista Colombiana de Estadística 37 (2014) 437–450

440                                Marco Fattore, Alberto Arcagni & Stefano Barberis


                                             RCI




               Basic                  Efficiency                 Innovation




Figure 1: Global architecture of the RCI. Circles in the bottom represent elementary
          indicators. Rectangles represent aggregation of indicators.



tool in action, on a simpler example. Regional Basic pillar scores are built as
averages of the corresponding 5 subpillars scores. Such 5 scores, seen as an ordered
set of indicator values, constitute what we call the “profile” of the region. If
one attempts to compare regions based on their profiles, a lot of “undecidable”
comparisons occur, whenever a profile is higher than another on a subpillar and it is
lower on another. As explained in the next Section, the set of profiles is technically
a “partially ordered set”. All of these undecidable comparisons disappear when
the aggregated Basic pillar score is computed, but at the cost of losing much
information on differences in competitiveness profiles.


3. Partial Orders and Hasse Diagrams
    Partial order is a very natural concept and examples of partially ordered sets
can easily be found in daily life, for example whenever one has to assign preferences
to a set of objects. In the following, we provide the formal definitions of partial
order and partially ordered set and introduce Hasse diagrams, the fundamental tool
for visualizing them (Rival, 1984, 1985, 1989; Freese, 2004). A partially ordered
set (or a poset) P = (X, ≤) is a set X equipped with a partial order ≤, that is
with a binary relation satisfying the properties of reflexivity, antisymmetry and
transitivity (Davey & Priestley 2002):

  1. x ≤ x for all x ∈ X    (reflexivity);

  2. if x ≤ y and y ≤ x then x = y, x, y ∈ X        (antisymmetry);

  3. if x ≤ y and y ≤ z, then x ≤ z, x, y, z ∈ X       (transitivity).


                                     Revista Colombiana de Estadística 37 (2014) 437–450

Visualizing Partially Ordered Sets for Socioeconomic Analysis                         441

    If x ≤ y or y ≤ x, then x and y are called comparable, otherwise they are
said incomparable, written x || y. A partial order P where any two elements are
comparable is called a chain or a linear order. On the contrary, if any two elements
of P are incomparable, then P is called an antichain. Given x, y ∈ P , y is said
to cover x (written x ≺ y) if x ≤ y and there is no other element z ∈ P such
that x ≤ z ≤ y. A finite poset P (i.e. a poset defined on a finite set of elements)
can be easily depicted by means of a Hasse diagram. Hasse diagrams are graphs
drawn according to the following two rules: (i) if x ≤ y, then node y is placed
above node x; (ii) if x ≺ y, then an edge is inserted linking node y to node x. By
transitivity, x ≤ y in P , if and only if in the Hasse diagram there is a descending
path linking the corresponding nodes. An example of a Hasse diagram is included
in Figure 2. In the case of partial orders built upon a large set of numerical profiles,
classical Hasse diagrams have two main drawbacks. First, in general the resulting
graph is very cumbersome and hardly readable, due to the “density” of nodes and
edges; secondly, any metric information is absent (as in the concept of partial order
itself), since Hasse diagrams just represent comparabilities and incomparabilities
among statistical units (later, we will take advantage of the flexibility in which
Hasse diagrams can be drawn, to graphically introduce some metric information).
Consider, for example, the Hasse diagram of 262 European regions assessed on the
competitiveness covariates previously introduced (Figure 3). As can be seen, the
diagram is very complicated. Moreover, Euclidean (i.e. visual) distances between
nodes do not imply any similarity between regional profiles. Only comparabilities
and incomparabilities are meaningful, but from the diagram one cannot assess
whether these are due to large or small (and possibly statistically non-significant)
differences between corresponding components of statistical unit profiles.


                             a                     b


                                   c                   d


                       Figure 2: Example of a Hasse diagram.


    Although the diagram of Figure 3 is very cumbersome, at the same time it
reveals a large number of incomparabilities among regions (red dots). As above
mentioned, these incomparabilities disappear in the aggregation leading to the Ba-
sic pillar index. It should be quite clear that a great deal of information gets lost
in this unidimensional reduction (and similarly in the whole aggregative computa-
tion of the RCI). It is our opinion that information pertaining to incomparabilities,
i.e. to competitiveness patterns, should be preserved and conveyed to those who


                                       Revista Colombiana de Estadística 37 (2014) 437–450

442                               Marco Fattore, Alberto Arcagni & Stefano Barberis


address the topic. Some complexity reduction is indeed necessary, to make the
diagram of Figure 3 more readable. This is the reason why we implement a clus-
tering analysis process, namely a Self-Organizing Map, prior to Hasse diagram
visualization (Tsakovski & Simeonov, 2008, 2011).




                 Figure 3: Hasse diagram for the Basic pillar data.




4. Self-Organizing Maps
    As already suggested by other authors (Bruggemann & Carlsen 2014), to sim-
plify large Hasse diagrams, the original dataset has to be preliminary processed
through some cluster analysis. After clusters have been generated, a representa-
tive for each is selected and a (smaller) Hasse diagram is built on these elements.
In Bruggemann & Carlsen (2014), a hierarchical cluster analysis is implemented.
Here we prefer to rely on a more sophisticated tool, namely Self-organizing map
(Kohonen 2001). The Self-Organizing Map (SOM) can be viewed as a non-linear
projection of a multidimensional density distribution on a bidimensional grid, such
that the topology of the input space is preserved as much as possible. The main
advantage of SOMs over classical clustering algorithms (e.g. hierarchical cluster
analysis or k-means) is that it can fit complex frequency distributions in an adap-
tive way. The resulting clusters are arranged on a regular euclidean grid in such a
way that regions next to each other in the input space are mapped to clusters next
to each other in the grid. The grid is thus a planar “image” of the input space.
Notice that in the application proposed in the paper, a limited number of clusters
will be produced, since the aim is to obtain an easy-to-read visualization. In this
respect, SOMs are not directly used as a visualization tool, but for their effective-
ness in extracting clusters, “exploring” the input density in an effective way. SOMs
are implemented in many programming languages. Here we rely on R3 package
“kohonen” that provides an effective and easy-to-use tool for practical computa-
tions. As explained in the package documentation (Wehrens & Buydens 2007),
  3 R Core Team (2013).




                                    Revista Colombiana de Estadística 37 (2014) 437–450

Visualizing Partially Ordered Sets for Socioeconomic Analysis                       443

and leaving aside more technical details, to apply the SOM algorithm, one must
previously determine the number of clusters and define how they will be arranged
in the bidimensional rectangular grid. Usually one performs several attempts, bal-
ancing between two conflicting needs, namely having a number of clusters (i) large
enough to assure for their internal homogeneity, but (ii) not too large, to avoid
losing interesting density patterns. All in all, setting the right grid and the right
number of clusters is an empirical task. After the grid is defined, to each cluster
an initial reference profile (called “codebook” in the SOM literature) is associated,
randomly extracted from the dataset. Then the SOM algorithm is launched. As
the algorithm proceeds, codebooks are updated until a smooth map is obtained,
where final codebooks are arranged in an ordered fashion. We refer to specialized
literature (Kohonen 2001) for details on the SOM algorithm and limit ourselves
to some examples, so as to show what kind of outputs are provided. Consider the
data pertaining to the Basic pillar of the Regional Competitiveness Index. As a
first example, we cluster European regions into 9 clusters arranged in a 3×3 square
grid. Clusters are depicted as circles and the corresponding codebooks are repre-
sented by the colored slices within each (this is the standard output of R package
“kohonen”). The larger the radius of a slice, the higher the corresponding profile
component. Statistical units are then assigned to the cluster whose codebook is
most similar to their profile. Figure 4 reports the result of the computations. The
left map reproduces the clusters and their codebooks; the right map associates
each statistical unit (represented as a dot) to its cluster (notice that some jittering
has been added, so as to avoid dot overlapping and give a visual impression of
the number of units in the clusters). Similar computations have been performed
increasing the number of clusters of the square grid to 5 × 5 = 25 and 6 × 6 = 36.
Results are depicted in Figures 5 and 6. Some remarks are in order. In each exam-
ple, clusters are arranged on the square grid in such a way that similar codebooks
are placed next to each other. This is the main effect of the self-organization
process implemented by the SOM. As the number of clusters increases, the SOM
reproduces more nuances “selecting”, in an adaptive way, which part of the input
density to reproduce with more details. Notice that the map orientation has no
absolute meaning and that some clusters may be empty. This is not a fault of
the algorithm, but a consequence of SOM topology preserving nature. Codebooks
of empty clusters may be seen as “bridges” between densely populated regions,
needed to preserve the smoothness of the map.



5. The Visualization Tool
    The principal aim of a visualization tool for multidimensional and partially or-
dered datasets is to provide a direct representation of the data structure, reducing
its complexity, but retaining the essential patterns in it. Hasse diagrams, the “offi-
cial” partial order graphical representation, convey a great deal of information on
the partial order structure of the data, but they are not easy to read as the number
of elements increases and, as noticed before, do not provide any metric informa-
tion, when this is available in the original data. Cluster analysis, on the other side,


                                     Revista Colombiana de Estadística 37 (2014) 437–450

444                              Marco Fattore, Alberto Arcagni & Stefano Barberis




                  Figure 4: 3 × 3 SOM for the Basic pillar data.




                  Figure 5: 5 × 5 SOM for the Basic pillar data.



reduces the complexity of the data, but it is not designed to preserve information
on comparabilities and incomparabilities. Following a suggestion Bruggemann &
Carlsen (2014), we combine Hasse diagrams and Cluster analysis in a complexity-
reduction process, producing a visual output allowing final users to jointly grasp
the partial order and the metric structure of the data. The visualization process
is composed of three main steps:

  1. Reducing dataset complexity through a clustering process based on a SOM.

  2. Building a classical Hasse diagram on the population of clusters, that is on
     SOM codebooks.

  3. Visually adding information on statistical units and clusters (particularly,
     information pertaining to the value of the covariates).

                                   Revista Colombiana de Estadística 37 (2014) 437–450

Visualizing Partially Ordered Sets for Socioeconomic Analysis                       445




                   Figure 6: 6 × 6 SOM for the Basic pillar data.



    We now build the visualization step-by-step, on the RCI data pertaining to
the Basic pillar. To make things easier, we reduce the population of 262 Euro-
pean regions to 9 clusters. Running the SOM algorithm identifies 9 codebooks,
represented by the colored slices in the circles of Figure 4. As a second step, we
draw the corresponding Hasse diagram on the codebooks, keeping the same color
codes (see Figure 7). Considering this image and Figure 3, we can see that clusters
are partially ordered and that there are many incomparabilities, i.e. essentially
different competitiveness patterns.




       Figure 7: Hasse diagram for SOM codebooks (3 × 3, Basic pillar data).


   The diagram of Figure 7 does not provide any metric information yet and we
cannot easily guess the values of different competitiveness scores, for each cluster.
As a third step, we thus move clusters vertically, based on the values of different
profile components. Figure 8, depicts the Hasse diagram of Figure 7 where y
coordinates correspond to the Institutions score for each codebook. Here we see
that clusters have different levels along the Institutions subpillar. Now the diagram


                                     Revista Colombiana de Estadística 37 (2014) 437–450

446                                Marco Fattore, Alberto Arcagni & Stefano Barberis




Figure 8: Hasse diagram for SOM codebooks (3 × 3, Basic pillar data). y axis: Insti-
          tutions.



has a metric meaning, at least along the vertical axis. Notice that moving clusters
vertically as done in Figure 8 does not affect the global partial order relation: if
a cluster is “greater than” another in the original Hasse diagram, then it is also
“greater than” another in the modified one. The same kind of diagram can be
obtained for other components. Sometimes, clusters overlap, as in the case of the
Health subpillar (Figure 9). Although not pretty from a visual standpoint, this
indeed conveys some information, i.e. that some clusters may be very similar with
respect to a component of the competitiveness profile. In our computations, all of
the five components of the Basic pillar are scaled to 0 − 1 (simply subtracting the
minimim and dividing by the range), so that y distances in the Hasse diagrams
are comparable and one can get an impression of the differences among score
distributions of the five subpillars, at cluster level. This is made easier if one
arranges all of the diagrams side by side, as in Figure 10, where the vertical axis of
the first Hasse diagram reports the profile mean of each cluster. Visual comparison
reveals many features of the data. For example, one sees that the Hasse diagram
reporting the mean value of the cluster profiles is very similar to the diagram
reporting the Institutions value. This is somewhat interesting, since Institutions
data are collected at national and not at regional level (i.e. each region in the
same Country shares the same Institutions score). So it seems that the mean
profile value has the same behavior of a national feature (at least at cluster level)
and that the metric structure associated to Hasse diagrams is the same for both the
mean and the Institutions scores. It may also be observed that the Hasse diagram
relative to Infrastructure has a “metric shape” very different from the others, with


                                     Revista Colombiana de Estadística 37 (2014) 437–450

Visualizing Partially Ordered Sets for Socioeconomic Analysis                         447

great variations in score levels. It is also interesting to look at the different vertical
positions of clusters in different diagrams. These reveal the existence of conflicting
indicators, explain the existence of incomparabilities and help in assessing whether
due to big or small differences in score values. These are some suggestion arising
from this kind of visualization and that may deserve further scrutiny, through
more technical, and less intuitive, statistical procedures and data analysis. As
usual, visualizations give the hint and suggest interesting directions to investigate.




Figure 9: Hasse diagram for SOM codebooks (3 × 3, Basic pillar data). y axis: Health.




Note 1. Other graphical features could be used to add additional information
to the modified Hasse diagrams. One could link the dimension of circles to other
covariates or use the background color to plot the value of other profile compo-
nents or even plot dot clouds in the circle areas (as in Figure 4) to give an idea
of population distribution. Benchmarks (e.g. the population mean value of the
subpillar measured on the y axis) may be graphically added to the diagrams, to
see whether a cluster is below or above it. Alternatively, the values of two covari-
ates could be jointly considered, moving nodes both vertically and horizontally, to
produce a bivariate “metric” Hasse diagram (i.e. combining a Hasse diagram and
a scatterplot). All of these options can be easily implemented with many software
languages, also adding interactions to ease user experience. Here we limit ourselves
to identifying basic visualization structures that may be improved using classical
infovis tools.



                                       Revista Colombiana de Estadística 37 (2014) 437–450

448                               Marco Fattore, Alberto Arcagni & Stefano Barberis




      Figure 10: Hasse diagrams for SOM codebooks (3 × 3, Basic pillar data).



6. Conclusion
    In this paper, we have proposed a simple way to visualize partially ordered
datasets. Partial orders arise typically when multicriteria evaluation problems are
addressed. They constitute an alternative to classical aggregative compensative
procedures, that solve multidimensional evaluation problems computing unidimen-
sional rankings, usually through some composite indicator. Admittedly, the final
output is more complex than a simple ranking, but at the same time it is much
more informative, reflecting the true nature of the data and helping final users to
realize the existence of complex patterns in the data. The procedure integrates
the Self-organizing map with Hasse diagrams and simple graphic design. It is
planned to develop an R package to make the visualization tool freely available,
adding also some interactive functions. The proposed way to combine partial or-
ders and metric information is indeed quite simple. More sophisticated approaches
could be explored. In particular, it would be very interesting to try to integrate
partial order structures within the SOM algorithm, so as to get the final Hasse
diagram through an adaptive process. The application of partial order theory
to socio-economic evaluation problems is still at an early stage, although some
methodologies have been already proposed, mainly in connection with multidi-
mensional poverty evaluation (Fattore, Bruggemann & Owsiński 2011, Fattore,
Maggino & Greselin 2011, Fattore et al. 2012). An R package, named PARSEC
(PARtial order in Socio-EConomics Fattore & Arcagni, 2014), is also being re-


                                    Revista Colombiana de Estadística 37 (2014) 437–450

Visualizing Partially Ordered Sets for Socioeconomic Analysis                       449

leased to the scientific community. The proposed visualization enriches the set
of tools available to researchers, and we hope this will promote the use of partial
orders in socio-economic studies.
                                                                       
                  Recibido: mayo de 2014 — Aceptado: octubre de 2014


References
Al-Sharrah, G. (2014), Ranking Hazarduous chemicals with a heuristic approach to reduce isolated objectds in Hasse Diagrams, in R. Bruggemann, L. R. Carlsen & J. Wittmann, eds, ‘Multi-indicator Systems and Modelling in Partial Order’, Springer-Verlag, New York, pp. 217–235.
Annoni, P. & Dijkstra, L. (2013), EU Regional Competitiveness Index - RCI 2013, Joint Research Centre of the European Commission, Luxembourg.
Barthélemy, J., Flament, C. & Monjardet, B. (1982), ‘Ordered sets and social sciences’, Ordered Sets 83,, 721–758.
Bruggemann, R. & Carlsen, L. (2014), ‘Incomparable - what now? Absorption of incomparabilities by cluster and fuzzy-methods’, Quality and Quantity, forthcoming.
Davey, B. A. & Priestley, H. A. (2002), Introduction to Lattices and Order, Cambridge University Press.
Dijkstra, L., Annoni, P. & Kozovska, K. (2011), A new European Regional Competitiveness Index: Theory, Methods and Findings, Technical Report 02/2011, European Union Regional Policy Working Papers. (RCI 2010).
Fattore, M. & Arcagni, A. (2014), PARSEC: an R package for poset-based evaluation of multidimensional poverty, in Bruggemann, R. and Carlsen, L. R. and Wittmann, J., ed., ‘Multi-indicator Systems and Modelling in Partial Order’, Springer-Verlag, New York, pp. 317–330.
Fattore, M., Bruggemann, R. & Owsiński, J. (2011), Using poset theory to compare fuzzy multidimensional material deprivation across regions, in Ingrassia, S. and Rocci, R. and Vichi, M., ed., ‘New Perspectives in Statistical Modeling and Data Analysis’, Springer-Verlag.
Fattore, M., Maggino, F. & Colombo, E. (2012), From composite indicators to partial order: Evaluating socio-economic phenomena through ordinal data, in Maggino, F. and Nuvolati, G. , ed., ‘Quality of Life in Italy: Research and Reflections, Social Indicators Research Series 48’, Springer.
Fattore, M., Maggino, F. & Greselin, F. (2011), ‘Socio-economic evaluation with ordinal variables: Integrating counting and poset approaches’, Statistica & Applicazioni pp. 31–42. Special Issue.
Freese, R. (2004), Automated lattice drawing, in P. Eklund, ed., ‘Concept Lattices’, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, pp. 112–127.
Kohonen, T. (2001), Self-Organizing Maps, Springer.
R Core Team (2013), R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing, R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria. *http://www.R-project.org/
Rival, I. (1984), Graphs and Order. The Role of Graphs in the Theory of Ordered Sets and its Applications, Vol. 147 of Nato Science Series C, Springer, Dordrecht.
Rival, I. (1985), The diagram, in ‘Graphs and Order’, D.Reidel Publishing Company, pp. 103–133.
Rival, I. (1989), ‘Graphical data structures for ordered sets’, Algorithms and Order 255, 3–31.
Sen, A. (1992), Inequality Reexamined, Oxford University Press.
Tsakovski, S. & Simeonov, V. (2008), Hasse Diagrams as Explanatory Tool in Environmental Data Mining: A Case Study, in J. Owsinski & R. Bruggemann, eds, ‘Multicriteria Ordering and Ranking: Partial Orders, Ambiguities and Applied Issues’, Systems Research Institute Polish Academy of Sciences, Warsaw, pp. 50–68.
Tsakovski, S. & Simeonov, V. (2011), ‘Hasse diagram technique as exploratory tool in sediment pollution assessment’, Journal of Chemometrics 25(5), 254–261. doi: 10.1002/cem.1381:1-8.
Wehrens, R. & Buydens, L. M. C. (2007), ‘Self- and super-organizing maps in R: The Kohonen Package’, Journal of Statistical Software 21(5).
