Dynamic-Interactive Graphics for Statistics (26 Years Later). Gráficas dinámicas interactivas para estadística (26 años después)
Universitat de València, València, España. Universidad Nacional de Mar del Plata, Mar del Plata, Argentina
Abstract
This paper briefly reviews the history of dynamic-interactive graphics for statistics, introduces an example of such graphics, and provides a few glimpses as to the current state of things and the future trends we envision. The general conclusion is that dynamic-interactive graphics for statistics are thriving more than ever as they shift from the desktop to the internet. Thus, dynamic-interactive graphics are becoming increasingly important as they: 1) provide non-experts in statistics with the means to carry out analyses on their own; and 2) teach the basic concepts of statistics to students and practitioners with low to moderate mathematics skills. Their increasing popularity makes the lessons learned over the past 26 years of research on the subject more important than ever.
Key words: Data Visualization, Dynamic Graphics, Statistical Graphics.
Resumen
Este artículo revisa brevemente la historia de las gráficas dinámicas interactivas en estadística, introduce un ejemplo y muestra del estudio actual del arte y las tendencias hacia el futuro. La conclusión general es que las gráficas dinámicas interactivas para la estadística son más populares que nunca y se han desplazado del computador a la Internet. Su importancia en ascenso se debe a que: 1) brindan a los no expertos en estdística los medios para llevar a cabo análisis; 2) enseñan los caminos básicos a estudiantes y practicantes con habilidades bajas o moderadas en matemáticas. Su popularidad hace que las lecciones aprendidas sobre los últimos 26 años sean más importantes que nunca.
Palabras clave: gráficas dinámicas, gráficas estadísticas, visualización.


1. Introduction
    This paper provides an overview of the history of dynamic-interactive graphics
and offers some insights on their current state and a glimpse into their future.
Dynamic-interactive graphics are graphics that can move smoothly and change
in response to a data analyst’s actions, with the changes being computed and
presented in real time. We use a compound word because as its two components
capture slightly different aspects of the graphics we are referring to. Dynamic
was the term originally used in the literature to denote the property to change
as opposed to traditional graphics, which are static. However, dynamic could
be understood as driven by itself, as in a movie or an animation, or driven by
the user’s interests or intentions, as in computer-managed interactivity. We used
this term in Young, Valero-Mora & Friendly (2006) and although its use is not
universally accepted, others have also used it as well (Cook & Swayne 2007).
    Twenty six years ago, in 1988, Cleveland & McGill (1988) edited a book titled
Dynamic Graphics for Statistics. This book marked a turning point in the sub-
ject at hand, as it summarized many systems that were implemented on special
hardware and also described systems based on personal computers which, at the
time, were beginning to dominate the scene. Indeed, prior to the publication of
this book, experimenting with dynamic-interactive graphics was restricted to a
few fortunate researchers with access to highly expensive facilities. However, at
the beginning of the 1990s, hardware capable of supporting these graphics had
become sufficiently affordable for their use to become more widespread. The most
significant event in the history of dynamic-interactive graphics has been their move
to Internet, which have made them accessible to all of users not only those with
formal training in statistics. In particular, we will discuss the impact that these
graphics may have on the modern teaching of statistics and in providing public ac-
cess to statistical databases. Before doing so, however, we will describe an example
of a dynamic-interactive graphic so as to give the reader a sense of the concept:
this example consists of applying the Box-Cox transformation (Box & Cox 1964)
using a slider in ViSta (Young et al. 2006).



2. An Example of Dynamic-Interactive Graphics:
   Interactive Box-Cox
    In this section we will introduce an example to illustrate the characteristics
and appeal of dynamic-interactive graphics for data analysis. The data shows how
these graphics can be applied to obtain visual transformations of variables, using
in this case the Box-Cox (Power) family of transformations.
    The Box-Cox (or Power) family of transformations is very useful for normal-
izing univariate distributions, often helping to make the variance of bivariate dis-
tributions homogeneous. A set of transformations capable of dealing with this
kind of problem is the Box-Cox family of transformations (Hoaglin, Mosteller &


                                    Revista Colombiana de Estadística 37 (2014) 247–260

Dynamic-Interactive Graphics for Statistics (26 Years Later)                        249

Tukey 1983). The formula for the Box-Cox family of transformations is:
                              p
                                (y − 1)/p f or p 6= 0
                     f (y) =                                                        (1)
                                 log(y)     f or p = 0

    Values of p in (1) are usually considered in the range of −1 to 2. In this range
they produce approximations to many well-known transformations. For example,
a value of p = 2 gives the square transformation, p = 0.5 is the square root, p = 0
is the log transformation, and p = −1 is the inverse transformation. Values of p be-
low 1, are known to improve the distribution of positively asymmetric distributed
variables. In turn, values of p above 1, will benefit negatively asymmetric dis-
tributed variables. Generally, the analyst will try successive p-values, looking for
plots of transformed data that conform to the intended shape; specifically, seeking
symmetric histograms for individual variables and closely linear and homoscedas-
tic scatterplots for pairs of variables. Univariate changes are not only useful per
se, but also because of their effects on the multivariate distribution of the data.
These effects are: 1) making non-linear relationships more linear; 2) promoting
constant variability across groups; and 3) improving additivity of a response in
relation to two or more factors (Hoaglin et al. 1983). For a complete view of the
results of the transformation process, all these consequences in the data must be
examined simultaneously. Trying different transformations to implement statisti-
cal graphics in a conventional way can be a cumbersome process. However, using
a program with dynamic-interactive graphics makes very easy to display the effect
of different transformations successively until the most satisfactory one is found.
This is possible because of certain features, such as the linking of different graphic
representations.
    We will use the ViSta program (Young et al. 2006) to demonstrate dynamic-
interactive transformations with data taken from the World Almanac and Book
of Facts (1993), which Rossman (Rossman 1994) presented as a good example
for teaching correlations and transformations. In ViSta, this dataset is included
in a file named tele.lsp and contains the following variables on the forty largest
countries in the world (according to 1990 population figures):

                        Table 1: Variables in the file tele.lsp.
                   LifeExpec       Life expectancy
                   LifeExpecMal    Life expectancy for males
                   LifeExpecFem    Life expectancy for females
                   PeopleTV        Number of people per television set
                   PeoplePhy       Number of people per physician


   A preliminary examination of this data reveals a strong positive asymmetry in
the variables PeopleTV and PeoplePhy. We will search for a Box-Cox trans-
formation that reduces this asymmetry using a visualization in ViSta.
   Figure 1 shows ViSta’s multi-plot tool for performing and visualizing transfor-
mations in an interactive way. It includes a scatterplot matrix of the variables,
a quantile plot of the variable currently selected (by clicking on the diagonal of
the scatterplot matrix), a slider that controls the transformation parameter, a line

                                     Revista Colombiana de Estadística 37 (2014) 247–260

250                                            Pedro Valero-Mora & Rubén Ledesma


plot of the original data versus the transformed data, and a list of the labels of
observations. Initially, the transformations are all linear and the first variable in
the dataset is the selected variable.
    The key to this visualization is the slider, that allows changing the p parameter
in (1). In fact, this parameter is linked to a slider so that manipulating the slider
modifies the argument and determines which function will be used to transform
the variables.
    We call the combination of plots shown here a spreadplot (Young, Valero-Mora,
Faldowski & Bann 2003) but others have used the term dashboard for a similar
layout (Few 2004). In this spreadplot, the slider is linked to the currently selected
variable. Hence, pointing and clicking the mouse on the arrows of this slider
will apply the Box-Cox formula to this variable using the p-value shown on the
slider. Remember that transformations with p > 1 make left-skewed distributions
more symmetric and transformations with p < 1 have the same effect on right-
skewed distributions. p = 1 means no transformation at all. The quantile plot
in the Box-Cox spreadplot allows assessment of this effect since it is connected
to the transformation of the variable currently selected. A data object for the
transformed data is created when the Box-Cox menu item is used, and the data
object is updated automatically. Thus, it is possible to check the transformed
values at any time. The scatterplot matrix, providing us with information on
the linearity and homoscedasticity of the bivariate relationships among variables,
varies as changes are made in the slider. Finally, the line-plot named “power of
the transformation” gives us information on the relationship between original and
transformed data, and changes as the slider is moved.
    The scatterplot matrix reveals several non-linear and non-homoscedastic re-
lationships. For example, the relationship between PeopleTV and LifeExpec
seems clearly non-linear. Not surprisingly, the relationship between LifeExpec
and its subsets, LifeExpecMal and LifeExpecFem, is clearly linear. Box-Cox
transformations with p < 1 will probably reduce this asymmetry and will bring
the data closer to the assumptions of univariate and multivariate normality.
    Successive values of p can be tested until more satisfactory plot shapes are
identified. The visualization in Figure 2 shows the set of transformations that
the data analyst liked best. Values of p were −0.30 for PeopleTV and −0.35
for PeoplePhy. The other variables were left untouched (hence p = 1). An
examination of the matrix of scatterplots in Figure 2 reveals linear relationships
between the transformed variables and the other variables.
   In summary, this spreadplot allows the user to view the effects of a transfor-
mation on several plots simultaneously, thereby allowing to find the right trans-
formation more efficiently.




                                    Revista Colombiana de Estadística 37 (2014) 247–260

Dynamic-Interactive Graphics for Statistics (26 Years Later)                                               251




                                                                                   Figure 1: ViSta’s Box-Cox visualization for the original (untransformed) variables.




                                     Revista Colombiana de Estadística 37 (2014) 247–260

Pedro Valero-Mora & Rubén Ledesma




                                                                                                                                                                               Revista Colombiana de Estadística 37 (2014) 247–260
                                    Figure 2: Box-Cox transformation spreadplot after applying the transformations to the variables. Note the linearity of the scatterplots.
252

Dynamic-Interactive Graphics for Statistics (26 Years Later)                        253

3. A Brief Review of the History of Dynamic-
   Interactive Graphics
    As mentioned in the introduction, the book Dynamic Graphics for Statistics,
published in 1988, was the first collection on a series of different experiments on
what was very innovative hardware and software, at the time. To a great extent,
its chapters inherited Fisherkeller, Friedman & Tukey’s (1975) work in Prim9 and
covered topics such as real-time graphics for analyzing multivariate data, how to
control graphics, interacting with scatterplots, handling different plots, rotation,
etc. The book also included the names of programs that, several years later,
would form part of the toolbox of those interested in dynamic-interactive graphics:
MacSpin, Explor4 and VisuaALS.
    The years that followed witnessed the emergence of several commercial and
non-commercial packages implementing concepts from the book and facilitating
their use to everyone. Whereas some previous programs required the use of hard-
ware which, in many cases, was priced in the millions, widespread accessibility to
personal computers, mainly those with a graphical user interface, made it possible
to run the software on computers that students could afford (as one of the coau-
thors of this paper can attest to). This GUI revolution in computing led to the
development of two commercial programs that included many of the techniques
described in the Cleveland and McGill book, as well as other new techniques.
These commercial programs are DataDesk and JMP.

   • DataDesk, developed by Velleman & Velleman (1985), included almost all
     the features required in a dynamic-interactive graphics program. Plots were
     linked by features, color, activation, state and so forth. Analyses were linked
     to plots, in a manner that removing some dots from a plot might result in
     excluding them from a dataset and, consequently, recomputing parameters
     and statistics. The list of features is very long and this is not the place to
     describe all; however, interested readers may download a demo version of
     this program covering all its features at www.datadesk.com. The program
     still performs very well and, used on modern hardware, is faster than it used
     to be. In fact, for those familiar with this program, it seems puzzling that it
     has not become much more popular and developed to the point of competing
     with the big names in statistical software.

   • JMP, on the other hand, supported by SAS, one of the big names in statisti-
     cal software, has undergone continuous development to this day. The very
     capable JMP package is at version 11, and includes a large array of statis-
     tical procedures mixed with statistical graphics, much in the same way of
     DataDesk. A demo version of the current version is also available.

A few months after the publication of the aforementioned book, a new language for
statistics and graphic statistics was released into the public domain. This language
was Lisp-Stat and it included a barebones Lisp programming environment de-
veloped by Tierney (1990) called XLisp-Stat (Valero-Mora & Udina 2005). This


                                     Revista Colombiana de Estadística 37 (2014) 247–260

254                                            Pedro Valero-Mora & Rubén Ledesma


system facilitated the task of exploring dynamic-interactive graphics significantly
and had a strong impact on the development of statistical visualization systems.
This should not seem odd, taking into account the three primary motivations that
Tierney gave for developing this language: 1) To provide a vehicle for experi-
menting with dynamic graphics and for using dynamic graphics in education; 2)
To explore the use of object-oriented programming ideas for building and ana-
lyzing statistical models; and 3) To experiment with an environment supporting
functional data.
   XLisp-Stat gave statisticians the opportunity to implement ideas related to
dynamic graphics in much the same way the prior statistical language S had already
provided a general statistical programming language (Becker, Chambers & Wilks
1988). In fact, some XLisp-Stat features were inspired by similar features or
functions in S. One of the strong points of XLisp-Stat, as Tierney and others
have mentioned, was the fact that it was based on Lisp, a general purpose high
(and low) level programming language that was (and is) well known and mature.
This guaranteed a solid technical foundation and a strong set of basic programming
tools. Based on this language, two major projects, ViSta and Arc, implemented
a number of techniques previously discussed in the literature or existing in other
programs, and at the same time were very active in the development of new ideas
and in promoting new advances.
    However, these two programs were not the only ones experimenting with inter-
active graphics. Although a complete listing of such programs is beyond the scope
of this paper, two deserve mentioning: Manet and XGoby.

   • Manet is one of several statistical visualization programs developed by the
     computer-oriented statistics and data analysis group of the University of
     Augsburg (Unwin, Hawkins, Hofman & Siegl 1996). Manet originally fo-
     cused on the visual estimation of missing values but later incorporated many
     other visualization techniques. It is particularly outstanding for visualizing
     categorical data.
   • XGoby (Swayne, Cook & Buja 1998) is a data visualization system designed
     to explore high-dimensional data with graphical views that can be brushed
     and linked. These views include dynamic-interactive scatterplots, parallel
     coordinate plots and scatterplot matrices.

Many of these non-commercial programs have been merged with R and there is
now a version of XGoby called RGoby, the research group that developed Manet is
now behind iPlots, a package for the R environment incorporating many charac-
teristics found in Manet but within a programmable environment. However, this
activity on the non-commercial side did not receive an echo of similar success on
the commercial side. Thus, at the turn of the millennium, what we believed was
the next logical step: inclusion of interactive graphics as part of large statisti-
cal packages did not occur. For example, SPSS included a module of interactive
graphics that was discontinued after a few versions. The other big statistical pack-
age, SAS, did not include this type of graphics, relying instead on JMP as a means
to offer them. DataDesk developers, on the other hand, maintained their solid


                                    Revista Colombiana de Estadística 37 (2014) 247–260

Dynamic-Interactive Graphics for Statistics (26 Years Later)                        255

product from the ’90s without major changes, but did not manage to gain a large
user base.
    Apparently, dynamic- interactive graphics were losing traction. However, a
new change in technology opened additional opportunities for interactive graphics.
This change was the launching of the Internet as the platform for distributing
statistical data and computing statistical analysis. New opportunities arising from
this change are discussed below.


4. The Present and Future of Interactive Graphics
     In recent years, the trend in computing has been to shift the functionality of
desktop software to the cloud, and statistics software is no exception. So, in what
it is an important advance, several new Internet-based systems have been designed
for data to be delivered publicly, bundled with a set of tools allowing analysis and
visualization of data. The availability of the data and the tools means that users
can pursue their own interests, given that the system allows selecting the data,
graphics, statistical summaries or models. It is worth noting that many of these
potential users are not experts in statistics, and therefore systems must be carefully
designed to avoid common mistakes they might make.
   Another important development is the growing availability of software that can
be used to teach statistics and allow students to interact with demonstrations and
carry out certain analysis. We will first discuss the use of interactive graphics on
the Internet and then continue with the topic of self-analysis.


4.1. Teaching Statistics
    Teaching statistics to students and practitioners of areas other than statis-
tics itself is an endeavor of giant proportions. Around the world, thousands and
thousands of students without much formal training in mathematics are exposed to
the rudiments of hypothesis testing, ANOVA, regression and other techniques con-
sidered basic by experts in statistics yet exceedingly difficult for novices. These
students demand an education enabling them to understand applications, main
concepts and usefulness of different statistical techniques, but without the burden
of having to learn what many of them perceive as the useless intricacies of arcane
methods. In his autobiography, Mosteller admits he was reluctant at first to ac-
cept the idea of teaching general concepts without some thorough understanding
of theory, but after years of contact with experts in other, he changed his mind
(Mosteller, Fienberg, Hoaglin & Tanur 2010).
    Visual demonstrations of techniques, such as those in Valero-Mora & Ledesma
(2011), are quite possibly a good way of achieving educational goals. In that paper,
we showed how cluster analysis and factor analysis can be carried out by “hand”
using simple actions such as rotating or selecting different views of datasets. The
software described in the above paper gives students an understanding of what
certain multivariate techniques can produce and how results can be interpreted


                                     Revista Colombiana de Estadística 37 (2014) 247–260

256                                              Pedro Valero-Mora & Rubén Ledesma


without going into details. This overview of the general usefulness of the techniques
can be a first step in their education.
    The idea that interactive visual displays are useful in teaching statistics is
widely embraced, as evidenced by the fact that even a cursory internet search
will turn up a number of demos and short demonstrations on many statistics
topics. Additionally, the two leading introductory statistics handbooks by De
Veaux, Velleman & Bock (2012) and by Moore (2011) incorporate demonstrations
of this kind. Further, Xie (2013) provides a package for R to create animations
that can be used to demonstrate statistics concepts. There are countless other
examples, a complete list beyond the scope of this paper. There is broad consensus
as to the possible benefits of this approach, although research on its effectiveness
from an educational standpoint is not as abundant as the available software. With
respect to interactive graphics, they are in many cases very close to techniques
that were developed for actual analysis, and not only for purposes of teaching
the analysis. Although we cannot other than applaud the efforts carried out in
this direction, it is also true that this separation might limit the potential impact
of interactive graphics in statistics. Moreover, students must learn two different
software systems for statistics: one used for teaching the concept and another
required for performing the analysis. Developers of statistics teaching software
might claim that the software’s learning curve is very low and the time required to
master the program is negligible. Nonetheless, the literature on human-computer
interaction often shows how apparently very-easy-to-operate devices often pose
significant challenges to users (Norman 2013). Additionally, the material to be
covered in statistics courses is already quite extensive in relation to available time,
and it is therefore quite common more attention be devoted to software that will be
used for real analysis whilst little or none is dedicated to interactive demonstrations
in the classroom.
    In our opinion, interactive graphics should not be left out of statistical packages
so that its learning ought to be part of the basic tool kit that students are required
to go through in introductory courses. In the previous section, we examined a
Box-Cox transformation as an example. If this capability were included as part
of any scatterplot in a statistical package, students might learn the importance of
transformations with the same tool that can later be used to transform the data in
practice. DataDesk and ViSta, for example, are statistical packages that include
these two roles, and therefore may be used both for teaching purposes and for
performing out the actual task.
    In conclusion, teaching statistics is one area of application for interactive graph-
ics with enormous potential, but we believe that for interactive graphics to yield
the impact they deserve, they have to be where the real action is: in statistical
packages and systems that are actually used in practice.


4.2. Self-Analysis by Non-Experts
   In 2007, the OECD organized a workshop on dynamic graphics for present-
ing statistical indicators. Amongst the presentations, Hans Rosling’s Gapminder


                                      Revista Colombiana de Estadística 37 (2014) 247–260

Dynamic-Interactive Graphics for Statistics (26 Years Later)                        257

presentations (http://www.gapminder.org/) stood out because of their high im-
pact media. As anyone who has played with Gapminder knows, its intuitive ap-
proach to public data analysis is both fascinating and instructive, and may even be
used by non-experts to gain knowledge about complex issues which would other-
wise need to be communicated in written reports lacking the joy of self-discovery.
Gapminder is fun and has shown how statistical data can be more democratically
distributed to all. Presently, supported by software such as Tableau, Spotfire,
Qlikview, Quadrigram, and Google’s data explorer, to mention a few, this approach
is growing exponentially and will perhaps be more influential than the authors of
the Cleveland and McGill book ever dreamt. New software allowing the creation
of graphical user interfaces in R (Valero-Mora & Udina 2005) can have an even
greater impact; one example is the shiny package (http://shiny.rstudio.com),
which facilitates the task of building dynamic-interactive graphics and inserting
them in webpages for programmers already familiar with the R language.


5. Discussion and Conclusion
    We wish to make a few comments on this topic not only from the perspective of
researchers who have been working on dynamic-interactive graphics for 15 years,
but also from the standpoint of statistics teachers and, lastly, of people interested
in the service that statistics may provide to the world. Let us address these views
one by one.
    As researchers on dynamic-interactive graphics, we observe that many devel-
opments currently applied actually ignore the base of knowledge that has been
built over the past two decades. It seems that much of the software is reinventing
ideas that have been explored previously and failing to give others demonstrating
good potential the attention deserved. Of course, this is not unusual. It is well
known that information visualization and statistical graphics communities work
in parallel without a exchange of ideas between what look to be very close fields
of research. Therefore, we do not take offense in not being considered as source
of insight. In other words, to paraphrase Newton, being the dwarves on whose
shoulders they stand on. However, it is not much fun at all to witness the rein-
venting of the wheel. We cannot help but be wary of developments that do not
include sufficient expertise from seasoned statisticians. Exciting as they may be,
systems that are developed by non-statisticians may lack the necessary expertise
and be flawed in critical aspects. Examples abound and the comments made by
Wilkinson (2001) about a software company are as relevant now as they were then:

          [said software company] implemented boxplots by placing the center
      at the mean, the edges of the box at one sample standard deviation on
      either side of the mean, and the ends of the whiskers at two standard
      deviations on either side of the mean. To this company, it appears,
      symmetry is the highest form of art.

As teachers of statistics, we regard these new systems as an opportunity. We
can use these interactive systems in the classroom and our students will learn


                                     Revista Colombiana de Estadística 37 (2014) 247–260

258                                              Pedro Valero-Mora & Rubén Ledesma


with real data. This might make our lessons much more memorable although the
pedagogical challenges are huge. However, we also feel that we should guide our
students to be part of this effort. In the future, they might well be in charge
of putting a front-end for the analysis of a database. We do not believe our
students should have to learn the technology in our classes-this should come after
the statistics-but perhaps the rudiments of human-computer interaction would be
useful, as we have learned from our own experiences designing a good interactive
graphic often involves decisions that fall into this domain. With this knowledge,
a data analyst not skilled in computer programming may clearly convey to a
computer scientist how things should be implemented. It is very likely that the
end result of this collaboration would be much fruitful satisfactory if the statistician
has an idea on how the user will interact with the computer.

    Lastly, as statistics users in our own applied fields of research, we feel that
dynamic-interactive graphics (and graphics in general) in actual practice do not
receive the recognition deserved. Although the literature on statistical graphics
has taken big steps in demonstrating their value, and highly influential books
such as Cleveland’s (1994) Visualizing Data, Tufte’s (1983) The Visual Display
of Quantitative Information, and Wilkinson’s (2005) The Grammar of Graphics
enjoy enormous popularity, their impact, in our opinion, falls far short of what
it should be. Despite being limited, we are starting to see static graphics finding
their way into academic journals and Wilkinson’s (2001) impression that not even
a boxplot could be found in the journals he had browsed is no longer the case.
But dynamic-interactive graphics are a completely different story. Of course, the
problem here is that a dynamic-interactive graphic tells a story that cannot be
displayed easily using static media such as paper (or its electronic counterpart as
we now very often read from a screen); a different form of expression is needed.
Videos or movies are maybe the answer to the problem and in some cases they can
illustrate the process of discovery that dynamic-interactive graphics are so clever
in supporting. However, it is possible that other forms of expression may be better
suited for the purpose of communicating something that has continuity but at the
same time demanding significant pausing in order to appreciate specific aspects,
easily overlooked in a constantly running movie. Mccloud’s (1994) reflections on
the formal aspects of sequential art provide a framework for thinking about media
that is somewhere between the written word, static images, and animations. Also,
new technologies now support document viewers that include all these different
types of media seamlessly. Actually, some academic journals accept these new
media types as part of their standard content. Thus, if the trend continues, it will
probably not be far-fetched to believe that in the near future dynamic-interactive
graphics will play a more important role in these new journals than today.




                                                                 
              Recibido: mayo de 2014 — Aceptado: noviembre de 2014


                                      Revista Colombiana de Estadística 37 (2014) 247–260

Dynamic-Interactive Graphics for Statistics (26 Years Later)                        259

References
Becker, R. A., Chambers, J. M. & Wilks, A. R. (1988), The New S Language:A Programming Environment for Data Analysis and Graphics, Wadsworth & Brooks/Cole computer science series, Chapman & Hall, California, USA.
Box, G. E. P. & Cox, D. R. (1964), ‘An analysis of transformations’, Journal of the Royal Statistical Society. Series B 26, 296–311.
Cleveland, W. C. & McGill, M. E. (1988), Dynamic Graphics for Statistics, Wadsworth & Brooks/Cole Statistics/Probability Series, Chapman and Hall/CRC, Boca Raton, FL, USA.
Cleveland, W. S. (1994), Visualizing Data, Hobart Press, USA.
Cook, D. & Swayne, D. F. (2007), Interactive and Dynamic Graphics for Data Analysis, Springer, New York.
De Veaux, R., Velleman, P. F. & Bock, D. E. (2012), Stats: Data and Models, 3 edn, Pearson, Boston.
Few, S. (2004), Show me the Numbers, Analytic Press, Oakland, CA. Fisherkeller, M. A., Friedman, J. H. & Tukey, J. W. (1975), PRIM-9: A data display and analysis system, Pacific Regional Conference of the Association for Computing Machinery, San Francisco, CA.
Hoaglin, D., Mosteller, F. & Tukey, J., eds (1983), Transforming Data, John Wiley, chapter Emerson, J. D. and Stoto, M. A., pp. 97–128.
Mccloud, S. (1994), Understanding Comics, Harper Collins, USA.
Moore, D. S. (2011), The Basic Practice of Statistics, 5 edn, W.H.Freeman & Co Ltd.
Mosteller, F., Fienberg, S. E., Hoaglin, D. C. & Tanur, J. M. (2010), The Pleasures of Statistics: The Autobiography of Frederick Mosteller, Springer, New York.
Norman, D. A. (2013), The Design of Everyday Things, Basic Books, United States. Revised and Expanded Edition.
Rossman, A. J. (1994), ‘Televisions, physicians, and life expectancy’, Journal of Statistics Education 2(2), 54–63.
Swayne, D., Cook, D. & Buja, A. (1998), ‘XGobi: Interactive dynamic data visualization in the X window system’, Journal of Computational and Graphical Statistics 7, 113.
Tierney, L. (1990), LISP-STAT: an Object Oriented Environment for Statistical Computing and Dynamic Graphics, Wiley-Interscience, New York.
Tufte, E. R. (1983), The Visual Display of Quantitative Information, Graphics Press, Cheshire.
Unwin, A. R., Hawkins, G., Hofman, H. & Siegl, B. (1996), ‘Interactive graphics for data sets with missing values - MANET’, Journal of Computational and Graphical Statistics 5(2), 113–122.
Valero-Mora, P. M. & Ledesma, R. D. (2011), ‘Using interactive graphics to teach multivariate data analysis to psychology students’, Journal of Statistics Education 19(1), 1–19.
Valero-Mora, P. M. & Udina, F. (2005), ‘The health of Lisp-Stat’, Journal of Statistical Software 13(10), 1–5.
Velleman, P. F. & Velleman, A. Y. (1985), Data Desk, Data Description Inc.
Wilkinson, L. (2001), EDA and the Internet, Technical report, SPSS Inc. *http://www.spss.com/research/wilkinson/Publications/tukey.pdf
Wilkinson, L. (2005), The Grammar of Graphics, Springer, New York.
Xie, Y. (2013), ‘Animation: An R package for creating animations and demonstrating statistical methods’, Journal of Statistical Software 53(1), 1–27.
Young, F., Valero-Mora, P., Faldowski, R. & Bann, C. M. (2003), ‘Gossip: The architecture of spreadplots’, Journal of Computational and Graphical Statistics 12(1), 80–100.
Young, F. W., Valero-Mora, P. M. & Friendly, M. (2006), Visual Statistics: Seeing Data with Dynamic Interactive Graphics, 1 edn, Wiley-Interscience, New York.
