A Probability Model for the Child Mortality in a Family 
Gorakhpur University
Abstract
This paper proposed, under assumptions of inflated type fixed displaced geometric model, the distribution pattern of families according to number of child deaths within the first five years of life. The proposed model involves several parameters related to child mortality in a family, which is estimated with Method of Moments and Maximum Likelihood Estimation techniques. The proposed models fitted the observed data showing a better approximation at the survey area and draw some vital conclusions.

Key words: F distribution, G-estimation, M -estimation, t-distribution, Mortality, Death, Contraception, Probability model.


1    Resumen
Este documento presenta, bajo el supuesto de un modelo geométrico de desplaza-
miento fijo, patrones de distribución de las familias, de acuerdo con el número
de defunciones de sus hijos menores de cinco años. El modelo emplea difer-
entes parámetros relacionados con la mortalidad en la infancia en una familia,
estimada con el método de momentos y de máxima verosimilitud. Los modelos
propuestos ajustan los datos observados, mostrando mejor aproximación a la
encuesta de área y describe algunas conclusiones vitales.
    Palabras clave: distribución F , estimación G, estimación M , Distribución t,
mortalidad, anticoncepción, modelos de probabilidad.


2    Introducción
Considerable interest has been shown in the past by several researchers to mea-
sure the levels of child mortality. Currently in the Developing Nations, the force
of child mortality is still high at the younger ages particularly during the infancy.



                                         1

Infant and child mortality remain disturbingly high in developing countries de-
spite the significant decline in most parts of the developed world. The state of
the world’s children indicated that about 12.9 million children die every year in
the developing world (UNICEF 1987). Mortality for infants and child under the
age of 5 years are expressed as the number of deaths in a given period. Infant
mortality is defined as death during the first year of life and child mortality as
that between the first and fifth birthdays. The deaths during childhood suffer
from substantial degree of errors. Usually errors occurs due to recall laps which
result in omission of events, misplacement of deaths and the distortion of reports
on the duration of vital events.
    The most important factors for child mortality are food shortages, contam-
inated water crowded and sub-standard housing, unchecked infectious diseases,
the absence of day care facilities for the children of working mothers and the lack
of minimally adequate and free medical care. The influences of most of these
factors are absent in the present areas of these countries under study. However,
some unmeasured genetic, environmental and behavioural components still re-
main nonnegligible. In demography Child Mortality are useful as a Sensitive
Index of a Nation’s Health Conditions and as guided for the structuring of
Public Health Programmes. Child Mortality is interrelated to social, cultural,
economic, physiological and other factor. The high rate of infant and child mor-
tality shows a low-level development of the health programme and also for the
Nation’s. Infant and Child mortality has been of interest of researchers and
demographers because of its apparent relationship with fertility and indirect re-
lationship with the acceptance of modern contraceptive methods (Kabir & Amir
1993).
    Some attempts have been made to estimate the levels of child mortality by
using data available from the different survey and other specific sources. Hill &
Devid (1989) have suggested an approach for estimating child mortality from all
births which have taken place in last five years before the survey. However, the
estimate obtained through this method also suffers from the problem of under
reporting (Pathak et al. 1991). In these circumstances, a number of attempts
have been made to study the age pattern of mortality by using models (Goldblatt
1989, Heligman & Pollard 1980, Krishnan & Jin 1993, Ronald & Lawrence
1992, Thiele 1972). Initially, Keyfit (1977) used a hyperbolic function to study
the infant and child mortality. Later, Arnold (1993) used pareto distribution;
Krishnan & Jin (1993) and Chauhan (1997) applied finite range model for the
same.
    Brass (1995a, 1995b) is one of the proponents of indirect method of mortality
estimation. He based his mortality estimate on retrospective data given by
women of reproductive age on the number of children ever born and their status
(either death or living). Other contributor in this line includes Preston & Palloni
(1977). However, indirect infant and child mortality estimates result from poor,
inadequate and incomplete data, especially in developing countries. Most deaths
outside hospital premises were not recorded and that many people do not record
infant deaths because they only keep track of such occurrence as misfortunes,
and when recorded, the age at death were either under or overstated.


                                        2

    The direct measures of mortality being not reliable, the problem may be
overcome by the recently developed model building approaches which make it
possible to obtain estimates from information other than vital statistics. In
this connection, Srivastava (2001) has been proposed a probability model for
the distribution of family according to number of child deaths (Deaths within
the first five years of life). The main objective of this paper is to modify the
Srivastava (2001) model by taking the finite range.


3     Probability Model
Let x denote the number of child deaths in a family at the survey point. Then
the distribution of x is derived under the following assumption.

    1. Only those families are considered in which at least one birth prior to the
       survey has occurred.
    2. At the survey point, a family either has experienced a child loss or not.
       Let α and (1 − α) be the respective proportions.
    3. Out of α proportion of families, let β be the proportion of families in which
       only one child death has occurred.
    4. Remaining (1 − β)α proportion of families, experiencing multiple child
       deaths, follows a displaced geometric distribution with parameter p ac-
       cording to the number of child deaths.

    Under these assumptions, the probability distribution of X is given by
                                                                  
                        P [X = 0] = (1 − α), k = 0                
                                                                  
                           P [X = 1] = αβ, k = 1
                                        k−2
                  P [X = k] = (1−β)αpq      , k = 2, 3, . . . , N 
                                                                  
                                  1−q N

   Where p denotes the success of child deaths in a family and q = 1 − p. If
we put q N = 0, then the proposed model (11) reduced to Srivastava (2001).
The proposed model (1) is an improvement over the Srivastava (2001) model by
taking a concept of finite range model i.e. k = 0, 1, 2, 3, . . . , N .

3.1     Estimation Method of moment
The method of moments is discussed to estimate the four parameters α, β, p
and N of the probability function (11). Now it is difficult to estimate all these
parameters, so it is assumed that N is the maximum numbers of child deaths
occurred. Let (x, f ) be a frequency distribution whose parameters to be esti-
mated from the observed distributions of families according to the number of
child deaths. The following estimation technique is employed for estimating rest
of the parameter.



                                         3

    Equating proportions of zero th cell, first cell frequency and simple mean
to their corresponding observed values respectively, which is converted into the
following equations,
                                  f0
                                       =1−α
                                   f
                                    f1
                                        = αβ
                                     f
                              "                                      #
                                1 − q N −1
                                           
                                                N q N −1      1
           X̄ = αβ + (1 − β)α                −           +
                                p (1 − q N )   (1 − q N ) (1 − q N )
   Where,
   f0 = Observed value of zero th cell frequency
   f1 = Observed value of first cell frequency
                                         P
   f = Total number of observations = i fi
   X̄ = Sample mean of the observed values.

3.2    Method of Maximum Likelihood
The proposed model involves four parameters α, β, p and N to be estimated from
the observed distribution of families according to the number of child deaths,
but it cannot be possible to estimate all these simultaneously by this method,
so the value of N has been taken as method of moments. Let x1 , x2 , x3 , . . . , xn
be a random sample of size N from the population (1). The likelihood function
L for the given sample can be expressed as

                                           f2                          f −f0 −f1 −f2
                                (1 − β)αp           α{1 − β − (1 − β)p}
   L = (1 − α)f0 (αβ)f1 ×
                                  1 − qN                  1 − qN
   Taking log both sides, we get               h        i
   log L = f0 log(1 − α) + f1 log(αβ) + f2 log (1−β)αp
                                                 1−q N
                                                          +
                                                            
                                                          p
                (f − f0 − f1 − f2 ) log α(1 − β) 1 −
                                                       1 − qN
   Now, partially differentiating w.r.t. α, β and p respectively and equating to
zero.
                         ∂ log L         f0       f − f0
                                 =−             +        =0
                           ∂α         (1 − α)        α
                          ∂ log L    f1     f − f0 − f1
                                  =     +                =0
                            ∂β       β          1−β
                               f2 1 − q N − pN (1 − p)N −1
                                                             
                   ∂ log L
                            =                                    −
                      ∂p                  p (1 − q N )
                                   "                              #
                                     1 − q N − pN (1 − P )N −1
                                              
              (f − f0 − f1 − f2 )                                   =0
                                      [(1 − pN ) − p] (1 − pN )


                                            4

   Solving equations (6), (7) and (8), the estimate of α, β and p can easily be
obtained as
                                        f − f0
                                     α=
                                          f
                                          f1
                                    β=
                                        f − f0
                                  p           f2
                                    N
                                       =
                              (1 − q )   f − f0 − f1
   The second partial derivatives of log L obtained is


                              ∂ 2 log L            f0        f − f0
                                         =−               −
                                 ∂α2           (1 − α)2         α2
                              ∂ 2 log L         f1     f − f0 − f1
                                          =− 2 −
                                 ∂β 2          β         (1 − β)2
                    ∂ ↑ 2 log L        f↓ 2 N (1 − N )(1 − p)↑ (N − 2)
                                                                        
                                   =
                     (∂p↑ 2)                          (1 − q ↑ )
                            hnn                           o                             oi
                                            ↑
                                   1 − q ↑ 2p 1 − q ↑          N (N − 1)p(1 − p)↑ (N − 2)
                                          
  (f − f↓ 0 − f↓ 1 − f↓ 2)
−                                         h                i
                                                        ↑
                                           (1 − q ↑ N ) 2

   Now, partial derivative of ∂ log L ∂ log L
                                ∂α , ∂β       and ∂ log
                                                     ∂p
                                                        L
                                                          w.r. to, β, p and α re-
spectively we get as following,

                        ∂ 2 log L   ∂ 2 log L   ∂ 2 log L
                                  =           =           =0
                         ∂α∂β        ∂β∂p        ∂p∂α
   Here,

                                  E (f0 ) = f (1 − α)
                                    E (f1 ) = f αβ
                                         f (1 − β)αp
                                E (f2 ) =
                                            1 − qN
                                                                     
                                                                p
                 E (f − f0 − f1 − f2 ) = f α(1 − β) 1 −
                                                             1 − qN
   Using the above facts, the expected value of the second partial derivatives
obtained as




                                            5

                                h                i
                                    −∂ 2 log L         
                                      ∂α2      1      1
                      ϕ11 = E             =        +
                                  f          1−α α
                              h 2       i
                               −∂ log L                  
                                 ∂β 2            1      1
                      ϕ22 = E             =α         +
                                  f            1−β      β
                              h 2       i
                               −∂ log L                  
                                 ∂β 2            1      1
                      ϕ22 = E             =α         +
                                  f            1−β      β
    the covariance between the estimators becomes zero since
                 2              2            2       
                  ∂ log L          ∂ log L        ∂ log L
              E             =E               =E              =0
                   ∂α∂β             ∂βδp           ∂α∂p
    Thus, the asymptotic variances of the estimator can be obtained as
                                 1       b = 1 , V (b     1
                         α) =
                      V (b          , V (β)         p) =
                                ϕ11         ϕ22          ϕ33

4    Application
The suitability of the proposed model is examined to the study that has been
conducted in NorthEastern Libya stretching from Benghazi to Emsaad. From
the study area, 7 localities out of 27 have been selected by probability propor-
tional to numbers of families in the localities. The data on fertility and mortal-
ity under age 5 along with some other demographic characteristics have been
collected from 1,252 couples of childbearing ages of selected localities. About
one-third (35.7 percent) of the investigated mothers have lost at least one child.
The percentage of multiple child loss mothers is 11.3 and these mothers have
given, one an average, 10 or more births. The differential in child loss by fertility
level is highly significant. However, child mortality to mothers having lower and
differential in child mortality by fertility in north-eastern Libya 325 medium (
6 ever born children) fertility is similar. This study indicates that high parity
and high mortality move in the same direction (Bhuyan & Deogratias 1999) and
one set of data has been taken from a Household Sample Survey in Brazil in
1987. Details are given in Sastry (1997). Other two set of sample data were
collected under a Survey entitled "Effect of breastfeeding on fertility in North
Rural India" in 1995 and "A Demographic survey on fertility and mortality in
rural Nepal: A Study of Palpa and Rupandehi Districts" in 2000. The details
of these two set of data are given in Srivastava (2001).
    The parameters of the proposed model have been estimated by the method of
moment and method of maximum likelihood. The estimated values of different
parameters are given in tables 1 to 4 for the child deaths.
    The estimated value of α are 0.3753, 0.2139, 0.2683 and 0.3570 for India,
Nepal, North East Brazil and North East Libya, respectively. It represents that
the proportion of families experiencing a child loss was found slightly higher


                                                 6

in India (0.3753) than North East Libya (0.3570), North East Brazil (0.2683)
and Nepal (.2139). The estimate of β are 0.5857, 0.7528, 0.6560 and 0.6846 , re-
spectively, for India, Nepal, North East Brazil and North East Libya. It means
that the proportion of families having only one child death was found greater
for Nepal (0.7527) as compared to other countries. The estimated values for
the probability of success of death p are 0.5889, 0.6257, 0.6490 and 0.6630 by
the method of moment and 0.6022, 0.7110, 0.6178 and 0.6592 by the maximum
likelihood, respectively, for the above mentioned
                                                  countries. The average num-
                                                                            
                                               (1−qN −1 ) N q(N −1)    1
ber of child death per family αβ + (1 − β)α p(1−qN ) − (1−qN ) + (1−q    N)   for
Eastern Uttar Pradesh (India), Nepal, North East Brazil and North East Libya
were found to be 0.63, 0.30, 0.41 and 0.53 respectively. This show that, on an
average, the child mortality is high in Eastern Uttar Pradesh (India). The exact
variances of the estimators obtained by maximum likelihood method are also
given. for Eastern Uttar Pradesh (India), Nepal, North East Brazil and North
East Libya were found to be 0.63, 0.30, 0.41 and 0.53 respectively. This show
that on an average the child mortality is high in Eastern Uttar Pradesh (India).
The exact variances of the estimators obtained by maximum likelihood method
are also given.
    Changes in levels of mortality may be attributed to socioeconomic factors
such as improvements in primary health care services, control of epidemics,
availability of health care facilities, and with the improvement in economic con-
dition among lower parity women, there is a downward shift in child mortality.
However economic condition and mortality move in the same direction among
high parity women. Differential impacts of age of female spouse at marriage are
observed among mothers of different parity level.
    A inflated geometric distribution for finite range provides a suitable descrip-
tion of child mortality at micro level, i.e. at the family level (Tables 1 to 4
). The value of χ2 are insignificant at 5 percent level of significance for all set
of data. The proposed model fitted satisfactorily and described the pattern of
child mortality to several sets of sample data in Indian Subcontinents.
    TABLE 1: Distribution of Observed and Expected Number of Families,
according to the Number of Child Deaths in Eastern Uttar Pradesh (India).
    TABLE 2: Distribution of Observed and Expected number of Families, Ac-
cording to the Number of Child Deaths in Nepal.
    TABLE 3: Distribution of Observed and Expected Number of Families,
according to the Number of Child Deaths in North East Brazil.
    TABLE 4: Distribution of Observed and Expected Number of Families,
according to the Number of Child Deaths in North East Libya.


5    Conclusion
From the above discussion of proposed model related with child mortality it is
concluded that infant and child mortality are still higher in Developing coun-
tries like India, Nepal, N-E Brazil and N-E Libya as shown in Tables 1 to 4 .


                                        7

Changes in the level of child mortality is directly or indirectly associated with
socioeconomic factors prevailing in that countries.
    To overcome the child mortality spread of education is first and foremost
essential factor. By imparting education to the parents and family members
they will be conscious and aware to the health of the child. To keep their child
healthy and sound they will follow the advice of the doctors from the date when
the mother is conceived. Parents will adhere the time schedule to vaccinate the
child to control different diseases. They will also care for hygienic atmosphere
and cleanness.
    Keeping all viewpoints, the proposed model is an essential tool for predicting
the child mortality level of any country and it can be used as an indicator of
good health condition of the society.


6    Acknowledgement
The authors are very thankful to referees for their valuable suggestions.
   [Recibido: julio de 2009 - Aceptado: diciembre de 2009]


References
Arnold B C. Pareto Distributions.(1993). Statistical Distributions 5.
Bhuyan K C, Deogratias R. On a Probability Model for Child Mortality Pattern in North East Libya.(1999). Turkish Journal of Population Studies.
Brass W. A Simple approximation for the time Location of Estimates of Child Mortality from Proportions dead by age of Mother in Advances in Methods for Estimating Fertility and Mortality from Limited and Defective Data.(1995). London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine.
Brass W. The Derivative of Life Tables from Retrospective Estimates of Child and Adult Mortality in Advances in methods for estimating fertility and mortality from limited and defective data.(1995). London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine.
Chauhan R K. Graduation of Infant Deaths by Age.(1997). Demography India.
Goldblatt P O. Mortality by Social Class, 1971-85.(1989). Population Trends. 
Heligman L, Pollard J H. Age Pattern of Mortality.(1980). Journal of Institute of Actuaries.
Hill A G, Devid H P. Measuring Child Mortality in the Third World.(1989). IUSSP Proceeding of International Conference.
Kabir M, Amir R. Factors Influencing Child Mortality in Bangladesh and Their Implications for the National Health Programme.(1993). Asia-Pacific Population Journal.
Keyfit N. Applied Mathematical Demography.(1977). John Wiley.
Krishnan P, Jin Y. A Statistical Model of Infant Mortality.(1993). Janasamkhya.
Pathak K B, Pandey A, Mishra U S. On Estimating current Levels of Fertility and Child Mortality from the Data on Open Birth Interval and Survival Status of the last Child.(1991). Janasamkhya.
Preston S H, Palloni A. Fine-Tuning Brass Type Mortality Estimates with Data on Ages of Surviving Children.(1977). Population Bulletin of the United Nations.
Ronald D L, Lawrence R C. Modeling and Forecasting US Mortality.(1992). Journal of American Statistical Associations.
Sastry N. A Nested Frailty Model for Survival Data, with an Application to the Study of Child Survival in North East Brazil.(1997). Journal of the American Statistical Association.
Srivastava S. Some Mathematical Models in Demography and Their Application - Doctoral thesis.(2001). Banaras Hindu University.
Thiele P N. On Mathematical Formula to Express the Rate of Mortality Throughout the Whole of Life.(1972). Journal of Institute of Actuaries.
UNICEF. The State of the World’s Children - Technical report.(1987). Oxford University Press.
