Correspondence Analysis of Contingency Tables with Subpartitions on Rows and Columns. Análisis de correspondencias de tablas de contingencia con subparticiones en filas y columnas
Universidad Nacional de Colombia, Bogotá, Colombia.  Universidad Politécnica de Cataluña, Barcelona, España. Universidad Santo Tomás, Bogotá, Colombia
Abstract
We present Intra-Table Correspondence Analysis using two approaches: Correspondence Analysis with respect to a model and Weighted Principal Component Analysis. In addition, we use the relationship between Correspondence Analysis and the Log-Linear Models to provide a deeper insight into the interactions that each Correspondence Analysis describes. We develop in detail the Internal Correspondence Analysis as an Intra-Table Correspondence Analysis in two dimensions and introduce the Intra-blocks Correspondence Analysis. Moreover, we summarize the superimposed representations and give some aids to interpret the graphics associated to the subpartition structures of the table. Finally, the methods presented in this work are illustrated by their application to the standardized public test data collected from Colombian secondary education students in 2008.
Key words: Multidimensional contingency table, Principal component analysis.
Resumen
Para presentar los análisis de correspondencias intra-tablas, se usan los enfoques del análisis de correspondencias con respecto a un modelo y del análisis en componentes principales ponderado. Adicionalmente, se utiliza la relación de los análisis de correspondencias con los modelos log-lineales para entender mejor las interacciones que cada análisis de correspondencias describe. Se desarrolla de manera detallada el análisis de correspondencias interno como un análisis de correspondencias intra-tablas en dos dimensiones y se introduce el análisis de correspondencias intrabloques. Por otra parte, se resumen las representaciones superpuestas y las ayudas para la interpretación de las gráficas asociadas a la estructura de subparticiones de la tabla. Finalmente, se ilustran los procedimientos con el análisis de una tabla de contingencia construida a partir de los resultados de las pruebas de estado realizadas a los estudiantes de educación media en Colombia en el año 2008.
Palabras clave: análisis en componentes principales, tabla de contingencias multidimensional.



1. Introduction
    Contingency tables (CT) with sub-partitions on rows and columns have row
and column categories defined from two nested factors. We use B(A) × D(C) to
denote the table structure. The rows are formed by factors A and B, with B
categories nested into A categories. In the same way, C and D factors form the
columns, with D categories nested into C categories. Each A category defines a
row band and each C category defines a column band. A sub-table crossing a row
band with a column band is called a block.
    The nesting may occur naturally, for example, in a table crossing subregions
and economic sub-sectors, where the subregions are aggregated into regions and
the economic sub-sectors are aggregated into sectors. In this case, we say that the
CT has a “true” sub-partition structure. In other applications, the researcher will
choose the variable defining the coarsest partition according to the objectives of the
study. For example, the notation age-group(sex) indicates that the categories of
the variables sex and age-group are codified interactively. The sex variable defines
the partition and the age-group categories are nested into the two categories of sex.
A four-way CT with factors A, B, C and D can be flattened into a two-way table
in different manners; for example, into the two-way CT denoted by B(A) × D(C).
   We cite hereafter several examples of CT with row and column sub-partitions
extracted from the literature:

Hydrobiological studies: species(taxonomic groups)×places(dates), i.e. phau-
    nistic tables, with row-species categorized into taxonomic groups and columns
    places × dates), being the same places observed at different dates (Cazes,
    Chessel   Doledec 1988).

Genomics: sequences(species) × codons(amino acids), a CT crossing sequences
    aggregated into species and codons aggregated into amino acids (Lobry &
    Chessel 2003, Lobry   Necsulea 2006).

Genetics: objects(populations) × aleles(loci), a CT with objects split in popu-
    lations described using alleles clustered into several loci (Laloë, Moazami-
    Gourdarzi   Chessel 2002).


                                      Revista Colombiana de Estadística 36 (2013) 115–144

Correspondence Analysis of CT with Subpartitions on Rows and Columns               117

   We aim at presenting different strategies, in the framework of Correspondence
Analysis (CA; Lebart, Piron   Morineau 2006, Ramírez   Martínez 2010), to
describe contingency tables endowed with sub-partition structures both in rows
and columns. Having this objective in mind, we do not discuss inferential methods
that might be used to analyze this kind of table.
    From a contingency table crossing the row categories B(A) with the column
categories D(C), several CA can be performed, depending on the sub-partition
structures that are considered. Each CA can be seen as a particular CA with
respect to a model, using the generalization of CA proposed by Escofier (1983).
This point of view allows us to consider the relationship between Log-Linear Mod-
els and Correspondence Analysis applied to the analysis of a two way contingency
table. This table is obtained through flattening a four way CT, as described in
Van der Heijden (1987).
   The structure of the CT, as well as the treatments applied to it, are deduced
from the objectives. Dolédec   Chessel (1991) lay out the use of these CA in the
environmental sciences.
    The first example considers a faunal table in hydrobiology field. The row cat-
egories are nested as species(group). The authors apply Intra-group CA (row
bands) and argue both that the specialists have different skills to identify species
in each taxonomic group, and that, in such a method, the between-groups vari-
ability is eliminated. The Intra-date CA (column bands) shows, more clearly,
the associations between species and sites. The Internal Correspondence Analysis
(ICA) is both Intra-dates and Intra-groups, as proposed by Cazes et al. (1988) to
highlight the species-site associations.
    Bécue-Bertaut, Pagès   P. (2005) present ICA as a double Intra-Table CA
and show that it can be computed either as a CA with respect to a model or as a
Weighed Principal Component Analysis. Furthermore, they propose to project on
the principal planes issued from this ICA, the “partial” rows (“partial” columns),
that is, the rows (columns) as seen from the different points of view corresponding
to each group of columns (rows). The superimposed representation of the partial
rows (partial columns) is obtained following the same rationale that Multiple Fac-
tor Analysis (MFA: Escofier   Pagès (1982); Pagès (2004)). These superimposed
representations ease the comparison of the different viewpoints and so enrich the
interpretation of the results.
    In this paper, the theoretical sections presented by Bécue-Bertaut et al. (2005)
are extended and Intra-Block Correspondence Analysis (IBCA) is presented. The
resulting methodology is applied to a CT built up from the results of the schools
standardized test scores answered by last grade Colombian students in secondary
education in 2008. The relationship between CA and Log-Linear Models are used
to show the interactions described by the different CA.
    §2 defines the notation, taking into account the sub-partition structures of the
CT. In §3 we present the different CA as specific cases of both CA with respect
to a model and Weighted Principal Component Analysis. The superimposed rep-
resentations are detailed in §4. The interest of the methodology is shown in §5,


                                    Revista Colombiana de Estadística 36 (2013) 115–144

118                           Campo Elías Pardo, Mónica Bécue-Bertaut   Jorge Eduardo Ortiz


by its application to the schools standardized tests scores in Colombia in 2008. In
the Appendix, the demonstrations of some formulae are detailed.


2. Notation
    The notation adopted in this work is close to this used by Bécue-Bertaut et al.
(2005). Let B(A) × D(C) be a CT with I rows and K columns. The factors A and
C have L and J factors, respectively. The L categories from A are sub-partitioned
into I1 , . . . , Il , . . . , IL categories, respectively; and, similarly, the J categories from
C into K1 , . . . , Kj , . . . , KJ categories. We use the same symbols to indicate sets
and their cardinality. Thus, I is both the set and the number of rows, that is,
the categories of B(A); K is both the set and the number of the columns. The
categories of D(C); Il is both the set and number of categories that are nested
into the category l from A. From the CT, the relative frequencies table F is built
up. It is structured as shown in Figure 1.

                                       Global Table F                                       Column Bandj : F∗j
                              1               j              J                                 j
                          1       K1    1         Kj     1       KJ   Margin              1        Kj Margin
                      1                                                               1

                1                                                                1

                     I1                                                              I1

                      1                                                               1



                                              lj                                               lj
                 l                           fik                      fi·l·      l            fik       fi·lj




                     Il                                                              Il

                      1                                                               1

                L                                                                L

                     IL                                                              IL

                                              ·j                                               ·j
              Margin                         f·k                       1       Margin         f·k       f···j



                                       Row Bandl : Fl∗                                        Block l, j : Flj
                              1              j               J                                j
                          1       K1    1         Kj     1       KJ   Margin              1        Kj Margin
                      1                                                               1



                                              lj                                               lj
                 l                           fik                      fi·l·      l            fik       fi·lj




                     Il                                                              Il

              Margin                          lj
                                             f·k                      f··l·    Margin          lj
                                                                                              f·k       f··lj

           1: Table
   Figure Figure     F with sub-partition structures in the rows and in the columns.
                 1: Table F with sub-partition structures in the rows and in the columns


                                        lj
   The general   term of F is noted by fik
           ——————————————————————————–     and its row and column margins by fi·l·
     ·j
and f·k , respectively. Fl∗ is the row band l and F∗j the column band j. The


                                                         Revista Colombiana de Estadística 36 (2013) 115–144




                                                             1

Correspondence Analysis of CT with Subpartitions on Rows and Columns                   119

                                       J
total of the row band Fl∗ is f··l· =         f··lj and the total of the column band F∗j is
                                       P
                                       j=1
         L
f···j =     f··lj .
        P
        l=1
  The block (l, j), noted Flj , has Il rows and Kj columns. Its row and column
margins are fi·lj =
                    P lj         lj    P lj
                                          fik ; and its total is f··lj =
                                                                         P P lj
                       fik and f·k  =                                        fik .
                      k∈Kj                   i∈Il                          i∈Il k∈Kj

   A cell of F is identified by the block , as superscript, and the specific cell into
                                               lj

the block ik , as subscript.
    F can be analyzed though the different CA presented in this work: a Simple
Correspondence Analysis (SCA); two Intra-Table CA, called here ‘analysis in only
one dimension’: the Intra-Column Bands CA and the Intra-row Bands CA; the
Internal Correspondence Analysis (ICA) or double Intra-analysis; the Intra-blocks
Correspondence Analysis (IBCA).
    To avoid misinterpretations, we use the expression ‘Intra-Tables CA’, when
the structure only concerns one dimension. When the structure concerns the two
dimensions, we use the term ‘Internal Correspondence Analysis’ (ICA) rather than
‘Double Intra-Tables CA’. ICA was proposed, with this denomination, by Cazes
et al. (1988). Pagès   Bécue-Bertaut (2006) use the term ICA for referring to
Intra-Tables CA only in one dimension because, in this case, the two methods are
equivalent.
    The clouds of points, associated with CA, are noted by using the letter N and
a subscript, referring to both the set of points and its cardinality. For example,
NI is the cloud of the I row points and NIl is the cloud of the Il points belonging
to the row band l.



3. Correspondence Analysis (CA)
    We summarize the use of CA to describe a CT endowed with sub-partitions
both in rows and columns. Each CA is presented as a Weighted Principal Com-
ponent Analysis, denoted P CA(X, M, D). X is the data matrix, issued from the
original data possibly conveniently transformed; M is a diagonal matrix corre-
sponding to both the metric in the row space and the column weights. D is a
diagonal matrix corresponding to both the metric in the column space and the
row weights. P CA(X, M, D) is also called, in French literature, the general factor
analysis (Lebart, Morineau   Warwick 1984, Escofier   Pagès 1992, Pagès 2004)
or duality diagram (Cailliez   Pagès 1976, Tenenhaus   Young 1985). This ap-
proach emphasizes the geometric point of view of PCA leading to call several
statistical measures as in Physics. For example, the barycentre or centroid corre-
sponds to the vector of means, the inertia corresponds to the generalized variance.
Active and illustrative elements are considered; the former are taken into account
to compute the principal axes while the latter, if present, are projected on the
principal axes previously computed from the active elements.


                                        Revista Colombiana de Estadística 36 (2013) 115–144

120                          Campo Elías Pardo, Mónica Bécue-Bertaut   Jorge Eduardo Ortiz


3.1. Simple Correspondence Analysis (SCA)
   SCA describes the residuals of F with respect to the independence model. The
independence model is defined as the product of the marginal terms. SCA applied
to F is also P CA(X, M, D) being X the matrix with the general term:
                                                                    lj          ·j
                                                                   fik − fi·l· f·k
                                                        xlj
                                                         ik =                 ·j
                                                                                                                                              (1)
                                                                       fi·l· f·k
and M and D the matrices:
                                                                                             ·j
                                 D = diag(fi·l· )                  and             M = diag(f·k )                                             (2)
M (respectively, D) is the metric matrix (matrix of weights) in row (column) space
and the matrix of weights (metric matrix) in the column (row) space.

3.1.1. Centroids of the Subclouds as Illustrative Elements

    In the row space induced by CA, the cloud NI can be considered as the union
of the L subclouds NIl formed, each of them by the points belonging to the row
band Il . The weight of the row point (l, i) within the subcloud NIl is fi·l· /f··l· ; thus,
the coordinate (j, k) of the centroid of the subcloud NIl is:
                                                                          !
                                           X f l·            lj                           lj
                                                 i·         fik                          f·k
                                                                 ·j
                                                                    −1         =              ·j
                                                                                                      −1                                      (3)
                                                f··l·     fi·l· f·k                    f··l· f·k
                                           i∈Il

   In the same way, the coordinate (l, i) of the centroid of the subcloud NKj in
the column space is:
                                                                            !
                                           X f ·j             lj
                                                             fik                          fi·lj
                                                 ·k
                                                 ·j               ·j
                                                                     −1            =                    −1                                    (4)
                                               f
                                           k∈Kj ··
                                                           fi·l· f·k                    f···j fi·l·


3.1.2. Inertia Decomposition from the SCA

   The partition of the cloud NK into J subclouds NKj induces the inertia de-
composition into BetweenInertia + IntraInertia:
   • Between subclouds NKj Inertia:
                                                                                                       2
                                                                         !2              lj          ·j
                           X               X             fi·lj                      X X fi· − fi·l· f··
                                   fi·l·        f···j               −1         =                                                              (5)
                           l,i              j           fi·l· f···j                    l,i      j            fi·l· f···j

   • Intra subclouds NKj Inertia:
                                                                                                                                    ·j lj    2
                                                                                   !2                                       lj      f·k fi·
        X              X             X f ·j              fik  lj
                                                                      fi·lj                    XX X                        fik −        ·j
                                                                                                                                      f··
               fi·l·       f···j                ·k
                                                                   −                      =
         l,i           j                f ·j
                                    k∈Kj ··
                                                                ·j
                                                        fi·l· f·k    f···j fi·l·                  l,i    j   k∈Kj
                                                                                                                                      ·j
                                                                                                                              fi·l· f·k
                                                                                                                                              (6)

                                                             Revista Colombiana de Estadística 36 (2013) 115–144

Correspondence Analysis of CT with Subpartitions on Rows and Columns                  121

    Through exchanging the subscripts i and j, we obtain the decomposition of
the inertia of the cloud NI into between-clouds NIl inertia and Intra-clouds NIl
inertia.


3.2. Correspondence Analysis with Respect to a Model
   Let A be the model matrix with general term aljik , with the same dimensions
and margins as F. The CA of F with respect to the model A, noted CA(F, A), is
equivalent to P CA(X, M, D), with M and D defined above, in (2), and X with
general term:
                                      lj
                                     fik  − alj
                               xlj
                                ik =     l· ·j
                                               ik
                                                                            (7)
                                       fi· f·k

   CA with respect to a model keeps almost all of the properties of the classical
CA when the model margins are equal to F margins (Escofier 1984). This is the
case for Intra-Tables CA.
   The inertia of both clouds NI and NK associated to CA(F, A) is:
                                                                        lj
                                                     X       X        (fik − alj
                                                                              ik )
                                                                                  2
            Inertia(NI ) = Inertia(NK ) =                                       ·j
                                                                                       (8)
                                                     l,j i∈Il ,k∈Kj
                                                                         fi·l· f·k

                                                                  ·j
   The SCA of F is obtained if the independence model H = (fi·l· f·k ) is used in
the Formula (7).


3.2.1. Decomposition of the Inertia Associated to the SCA when A
       Model is Considered

    Equation (8) is also the chi-square distance centered in H between the con-
joint probability distributions F and A, noted d2χ2 (F, A) (Cailliez   Pagès 1976,
                                                   H
p.449).
   It is possible to perform a SCA with respect to model A, denoted CA(A, H).
The associated clouds NI and NK have inertia:
                                                                          l· ·j 2
                                                X         X       (alj
                                                                    ik − fi· f·k )
           Inertia(NI ) = Inertia(NK ) =                                        ·j
                                                                                       (9)
                                                 l,j i∈Il ,k∈Kj
                                                                         fi·l· f·k

   The inertia (9) is also the chi−square distance, centered in H, between the
conjoint probability distributions A and H: d2χ2 (A, H).
                                                         H

   If A and F have the same margins and
                                         
                                 lj    lj   lj
                           X fik − aik aik
                                                ·j
                                                             =0                       (10)
                            l,i,j,k
                                         fi·l· f·k


                                      Revista Colombiana de Estadística 36 (2013) 115–144

122                  Campo Elías Pardo, Mónica Bécue-Bertaut   Jorge Eduardo Ortiz


the inertia associated to CA(F, H) is the sum of the inertias associated to CA(F, A)
and CA(A, H):
                      d2χ2 H (F, H) = d2χ2 H (F, A) + d2χ2 H (A, H)             (11)

      The demonstration can be found in the Appendix (§Appendix A.1).
    In particular, the models associated with CA Intra-bands and ICA, presented
hereafter, fulfill the conditions to obtain the inertia decomposition of SCA shown
in (11).

3.2.2. Correspondence Analysis and Log-Linear Models

    CA(F, A) describes the residuals with respect to model A. Hence, it is possible
to perform specific CA to analyze the residuals of a log-linear model or to eliminate
some interactions in SCA to better describe the non-eliminated ones (Van der
Heijden 1987, Van der Heijden, de Falguerolles   de Leeuw 1989).
      The saturated log-linear model associated to a four-way table is:
      lj
  ln(πik ) = u + uA(l) + uB(i) + uC(j) + uD(k) +
               uAB(li) + uCA(lj) + uAD(lk) + uBC(ij) + uBD(ik) + uCD(jk) +
                     uABC(lij) + uABD(lik) + uCAD(lkj) + uBCD(ijk) + uABCD(lijk)         (12)
        lj
 where πik  is the probability of the cell (.)lj
                                              ik and the u terms are the model
parameters.
   If F (Figure 1) is the “flattened” B(A) × D(C) of a four-way CT, the inde-
pendence model H corresponds to the log-linear model [AB][CD]1 estimation (A
and B are jointly independent from C and D). This model is the sum of the four
main effects and the first order interactions AB and CD. Then, the CA of F
(CA(F, H)) describes the interactions AC, AD, BC, BD and those of superior
order.
    From a ‘true’ sub-partition structure, the row factors A and B and the column
factors C and D are nested and, therefore, have no interactions between each
couple. The saturated model (12) is reduced to:
     lj
 ln(πik ) = u + uA(l) + uB(i) + uC(j) + uD(k) + uCA(lj) + uAD(lk) + uBC(ij) + uBD(ik) (13)
In this case, the H model represents all the main effects and the SCA is the
description of all the interactions in (13).


3.3. Intra-Table Analysis
    We denominate Intra-Row Band/Column Analysis, the two Intra-Table Anal-
ysis that are possible to perform on the F table. We only summarize the Intra-
Column Band Analysis, because the other one can be symmetrically deduced.
   1 With this notation, the model includes the whole interactions between the variables that

belong to the same square brackets. For example, the [AB][C] model represents the main effects
and the interactions between A and B.


                                        Revista Colombiana de Estadística 36 (2013) 115–144

Correspondence Analysis of CT with Subpartitions on Rows and Columns                     123

   F is considered as the juxtaposition of the J column bands, as shown by Bécue-
Bertaut   Pagès (2004) in the Multiple Factor Analysis of Contingency Tables
(MFACT):
                             F = [F∗1 · · · F∗j · · · F∗J ]

The Intra-Column Band CA is the CA of F with respect to the Intra-Bands Inde-
pendence Model, denoted AJ , with general term:
                                                          ·j
                                                   fi·lj f·k
                                       (aJ )lj
                                            ik =                                         (14)
                                                     f···j

   This is the estimation of the log-linear model [ABC][CD] (A and B are jointly
independent from D, when C is given). This model includes the interactions AB,
AC, BC, CD and ABC; thus, the CA(F, AJ ) describes the interactions, AD, BD,
ABD, ACD and ABCD. If the subpartition structure is ‘true’, the CA(F, AJ )
describes the interactions AD and BD (see §3.2.2).
   Symmetrically, the Intra-Row Band Independence Model AL , [AB][ACD] (C
and D are jointly independent from B, given A), includes AB, AC, AD, CD and
CAD. Thus, the CA(F, AL ) describes the interactions BC, BD, ABD, ABC and
ABCD.
   The Intra-Column Bands Analysis, CA(F, AJ ), is computed as P CA(X, M, D),
where X is the matrix with general term:
                                             lj
                                            fik        fi·lj
                                xlj
                                 ik =            ·j
                                                    −                                    (15)
                                          fi·l· f·k   fi·l· f···j

and M and D are metric and weight matrices already defined in (2).
    We observe that (15) is equal to (1) - (4): in the Intra-Column Bands CA, the
subclouds NKj in the space RI are translated such as their centroids are in the
origin. Figure 2a. shows the centroids of the subclouds in SCA and Figure 2b. the
same subclouds, but centered in the origin. By centering, the associated inertia to
CA(F, AJ ) is the Intra subclouds NKj inertia from the SCA of F.

                                                               RI
               RI
                             NK2
        NK1

                                                   NK1                    NK2

                          NK3                                       NK3


      a. Subclouds associated to SCA     b. Centered subclouds (Intra-Column Bands CA)
          Figure2:1:Subclouds
         Figure      SubcloudsininRRI, ,associated
                                   I
                                                     to the
                                         associated to        three column
                                                         the three  column bands.




                                         Revista Colombiana de Estadística 36 (2013) 115–144
     ——————————————————————————–

124                 Campo Elías Pardo, Mónica Bécue-Bertaut   Jorge Eduardo Ortiz


3.3.1. Inertia Decomposition of SCA of F

    In the SCA of F, the inertia of the NK cloud in RI can be expressed as the
sum of the between and intra-inertias subclouds NKj obtained replacing A by AJ
in (11):
                     d2χ2 (F, H) = d2χ2 (AJ , H) + d2χ2 (F, AJ )           (16)

    The two right terms in (16) are associated, respectively, to the following CA
(see Appendix Appendix A.2):

   • CA(AJ , H), which is also the SCA of the table TJ , with general term fi·lj
     and dimension I × J.

   • CA(F, AJ ), which is the Intra-Column Bands CA of F.


3.3.2. Subclouds NIl ∈ RK from the Intra-Column Bands CA

   In the Intra-Column Bands CA it is possible to obtain the centroids of the
subclouds NIl ∈ RK and to project them as illustrative elements. The general
term of the coordinate (j, k) of the centroid of the sub cloud NIl is:
                                                      !
                                   lj                           lj
                   X f l·
                        i·     fik         fi·lj           f·k          f··lj
                                     ·j
                                        −               =            −             (17)
                       f··l· fi·l· f·k
                    i∈Il
                                          fi·l· f···j             ·j
                                                          f··l· f·k    f··l· f···j


3.4. Internal Correspondence Analysis (ICA)
    The Double Intra Bands CA is obtained by centring the subclouds NIl of the
Intra-Column Bands CA. Then, the general term of X is equal to (15) - (17):
                                lj            lj
                               fik         f·k       fi·lj         f··lj
                      xlj
                       ik =          ·j
                                        −  ·j l·
                                                  −             +                              (18)
                              fi·l· f·k   f·k f··   fi·l· f···j   f··l· f···j

    The Formula (18) can also been obtained centering the subclouds NKj in the
Intra-Row Bands CA.
   The double Intra CA or Internal Correspondence Analysis (ICA) is the CA(F, C),
where C is the model with general term:
                                    lj l·             ·j          ·j lj
                                   f·k  fi·   fi·lj f·k    fi·l· f·k f··
                           clj
                            ik =            +            −                                     (19)
                                     f·˙l·      f···j        f··l· f···j

                                                                   ·j lj
                                                            fi·l· f·k f··
      We denote E the matrix with general term                              , then C can be written
                                                              f··l· f···j
AJ + AL − E and expressed as:

                            C = [AJ − E] + [AL − E] + E                                        (20)


                                         Revista Colombiana de Estadística 36 (2013) 115–144

Correspondence Analysis of CT with Subpartitions on Rows and Columns                 125

   The inertia of the SCA of F can be decomposed as follows:
         d2χ2 (F, H) = d2χ2 (E, H) + d2χ2 (AJ , E) + d2χ2 (AL , E) + d2χ2 (F, C)    (21)

   Following Sabatier (1987), the right hand terms in (21) are ( see §Appendix
A.2 in the Appendix):

   • SCA of table T formed by the sum of the blocks (l, j), with general term f··lj
     and dimension L × J. This CA describes the interactions AC, i.e. between
     the factors defining the row and column bands.
   • Intra-Tables CA of TJ , with general term fi·lj and dimension I × J. TJ is a
     three-way table, since it is the margin of the column bands of F, so factor
     D disappears. The Intra-Tables CA of TJ corresponds to the residuals with
     respect to the model [AB][AC] (B is independed of C, given A). The model
     contains the interactions AB and AC; thus, the Intra-Tables CA describes
     the interactions BC and ABC.
                                                      lj
   • Intra-Tables CA of TL , with the general term f·k   and dimension L × K.
     Table T is the margin of the row bands of F, hence, it is a three way table.
             L

     This Intra-Table CA describes the interactions AD and ACD, that are the
     residuals with respect to the model [AC][CD] (A is an independent from D,
     when C is given).
   • ICA of F (CA(F, C)). C is not the estimation of a log-linear model, its
     structure is additive instead of multiplicative. Because the four CA contain
     all of the interactions from the CA(F), the ICA describes the interactions
     that are not in the three former CA, i.e. BD, ABD, BCD and ABCD.

    In other words, the SCA of F is a global analysis that can be decomposed into
four CA, where the first order interactions present in the SCA of F, are separated.
The inertias associated with the four CA and their relative contributions to the
inertia from the SCA are indicators of the importance of these associations.

3.4.1. Intra-Bands CA as Particular Cases of ICA

    Intra-Row Bands CA is a particular case of ICA because it can be obtained
by considering the L row bands but only one column band with K columns. The
Intra-Column Band CA can be obtained considering the J column bands but only
one row band with I rows. In the former case, the terms 1 and 3 from (19)
cancel one another; in the second case the terms 2 and 3 cancel one another.
This justifies the name of “Internal Correspondence Analysis” (ICA) given to one
dimension Intra-Tables CA by Pagès   Bécue-Bertaut (2006).

3.4.2. ICA as a Weighted PCA

    ICA is the CA(F, C), i.e. the P CA(X, M, D), where X has the general term
given in (18) and M and D are defined in (2). In this analysis, the representa-
tions in spaces RK and RI are symmetric: in RK the cloud NI is divided into L


                                      Revista Colombiana de Estadística 36 (2013) 115–144

126                    Campo Elías Pardo, Mónica Bécue-Bertaut   Jorge Eduardo Ortiz


subclouds NIl ; in RI the cloud NK is divided into J subclouds NKj . Without loss
of generality, the properties are presented below in the space RK .

3.4.3. Row Clouds in RK

    In ICA, the cloud NI of the I rows is formed by the union of the L subclouds
NIl , each centered in the origin. So, the coordinate of a point (l, i) represents the
deviation of the point with respect to the centroid of the subcloud NIl to which it
belongs (Figure 2).

Distances: the square distance between two row points is:
                                                                            0         0   !2
                                                        lj
                   2        0   0
                                         X 1           fik − clj      fil0 kj − cli0jk
                d [(l, i), (l , i )] =           ·j
                                                                 ik
                                                                    −           0              (22)
                                         j,k
                                                f·k        fi·l·             fil0 ··

   Two points (l, i) and (l0 , i0 ) are close to one another if their deviations to the
                                                     ·j
respective model, weighted with the inverse of f·k      , are similar for every (j, k). A
point (l, i) is located far from the origin if row (l, i) in table F differs from the
model C (Escofier 2003, p. 120).

Transition Formulae: a row coordinate Fs (l, i) on a factorial axis s is a function
of the column coordinates Gs (j, k) (see §Appendix A.3):
                                                       !
                                             lj     lj
                              1 X X fik            f·k
                 Fs (l, i) = √                    − l· Gs (j, k)               (23)
                               λs j         fi·l·  f··
                                                k∈Kj

Formula (23) indicates that a row (l, i) lies on the same side that the columns (j, k)
whose coordinates are greater than the coordinates of the homologous columns in
the l band margin.

Aids to the Interpretation: the contribution to the inertia and the quality of
representation on the axes are calculated for each row point. Moreover, aids to
the interpretation are defined for each subcloud NIl :
   • Weight subcloud: f··l· .
   • Quality of representation on axis s: Inertias (NIl )/Inertia(NIl ).
                                    Inertias (l, i) = fi·l· (Fs (l, i))2

      Therefore:                                          X
                                Inertias (NIl ) =                fi·l· (Fs (l, i))2
                                                          i∈Il

      In RK the contribution of a row point to the inertia of cloud NI is:
                                     Inertia(l, i) = fi·l· x0li Mxli
                                                      ·j
      where x0li is the row (l, i) of X and M = diag(f·k ).


                                               Revista Colombiana de Estadística 36 (2013) 115–144

Correspondence Analysis of CT with Subpartitions on Rows and Columns                                            127

   • Contribution to axis inertia: the sum of the inertia of the points belonging
     to the subcloud.


3.5. Intra-blocks Correspondence Analysis (IBCA)
   Intra-blocks Correspondence Analysis of F, denoted IBCA(F), is defined as
the CA with respect to the Intra-blocks Independence Model B, using the same
metrics as the SCA of F. The general term of B is defined by:
                                                              lj
                                                       fi·lj f·k
                                               blj
                                                ik =                                                            (24)
                                                            f··lj

   B is the estimation of the log-linear model [ABC][ACD] (B is independent of
D, when AC is given). This model includes the interactions AB, AC, BC, CD,
AD, ABC and CAD; thus, the IBCA (CA(F, B)) describes the interactions BD,
ABD, BCD and ABCD.
    If the CT has a ‘true’ partition structure, the interactions AB, CD and those
of superior order including them do not exist. Hence, the model B contains only
the interactions AC, BC and AD and IBCA describes the interactions BD (see
§3.2.2).
   IBCA(F) is the P CA(X, M, D) with:

              ·j
   • M= diag(f·k )

   • D= diag(fi·l· )

   • X with general term given by:

                                                                     lj     fi·lj f·k
                                                                                   lj

                                                lj                  fik −
                                               fik − blj                      f··lj
                                       xlj
                                        ik =
                                                      ik
                                                       ·j
                                                               =              ·j
                                                                                                                (25)
                                                fi·l· f·k              fi·l· f·k


3.5.1. Centered Clouds and Subclouds

   The cloud NI formed by the I points is centered, because the margins of table
F and model B are equal.
   Each subcloud NIl formed by the Il points belonging to the row band l are
                           f l·
centered, using the weights i·l· :
                           f··

                  lj
                                  lj
                           fi·lj f·k
                 fik −                           X f lj     X f lj f lj
                                                                                      !
                                                                                               lj    lj
      1 X l·                  f··lj      1            ik         i· ·k                        f·k − f·k
           fi·                ·j
                                       = l·            ·j
                                                          −       lj ·j
                                                                                          =           ·j
                                                                                                           =0
     f··l·             fi·l· f·k        f··          f                                         f··l· f·k
         i∈Il                                    i∈Il ·k        f
                                                            i∈Il ·· f·k



                                               Revista Colombiana de Estadística 36 (2013) 115–144

128                   Campo Elías Pardo, Mónica Bécue-Bertaut   Jorge Eduardo Ortiz


3.5.2. Distances

      The square distance between two row points is:

                                                                              0       0   !2
                                                        lj
                  2          0   0
                                          X 1          fik − blj      fil0 kj − bli0jk
                 d [(l, i), (l , i )] =           ·j
                                                                 ik
                                                                    −           0              (26)
                                          j,k
                                                 f·k       fi·l·             fil0 ··


   Two points (l, i) and (l0 , i0 ) are close to each other if they similarly differ from
                                                      ·j
the model. Each difference is pondered by 1/f·k          . Therefore, a point (l, i) is far
from the origin when the row (l, i) of table F strongly differs from the model B
(Escofier 2003, p.120).


3.5.3. Transition Formulae

   The formulae allowing the simultaneous representation of row and column
points, as well as their interpretation, are:
                                                                      !
                                                        lj
                                     1 X               fik − blj ik
                        Fs (l, i) = √                                     Gs (j, k) ;
                                      λs j,k               fi·l·
                                                                      !                        (27)
                                                        lj
                                    1 X                fik − blj
                                                              ik
                       Gs (j, k) = √                        ·j
                                                                          Fs (l, i)
                                     λs l,i                f·k


    Attractions between row and column profiles exist when the observed frequen-
cies are greater than the values in the model.


3.5.4. Aids to the Interpretation

    The aids to interpretation used in CA are also available in IBCA, i.e. con-
tribution to the axis inertia and square cosines. Similarly, the aids associated to
subclouds NKj and NIl are expressed in ICA.


3.5.5. Intra-Blocks CA only in one Dimension

    If only one dimension structure is considered, model B becomes the intra-
row bands independence or the intra-column bands model, depending of the case.
Thus, the Intra Bands CA can also be considered as Intra-Blocks Analysis in one
single dimension.
    IBCA has the advantage of being associated with a log-linear model, while ICA
allows us to split the inertia of the clouds associated to SCA in four addends, each
corresponding to a CA (see 3.4).


                                                Revista Colombiana de Estadística 36 (2013) 115–144

Correspondence Analysis of CT with Subpartitions on Rows and Columns               129

4. Superimposed Representation of the Partial and
   Global Clouds over a Common Referential
    In ICA or IBCA, the global representation of the cloud NI , in the row space,
is obtained considering the whole K coordinates for each row point (l, i). The
sub-partition of the columns into J bands also permits to consider each row from
the point of view of each J band. Thus, there are J points, denoted (l, i)j and
called partial points, considered and projected as illustrative points. The simul-
taneous projections of global and partial points are denominated superimposed
representations.


4.1. Projection of the Partial Clouds
   The projections of the partial clouds are defined as done by Pagès (2004) in
the frame of multiple factor analysis (MFA).

   • Each column j induces the partial cloud NIj ⊂ RKj ⊂ RK =           R , Mj is
                                                                       L Kj
                                                                        j
     the metrics in RKj obtained from M, the coordinates of the points NIj are
     the rows of X∗j and the coordinates of these points in RK are the rows of
     the matrix Xe ∗j defined as:

                             e ∗j = [0 · · · 0 X∗j 0 · · · 0]
                             X

   • The union of the J partial clouds form the cloud NIJ with IJ points, that
     can also be considered as the union of the I clouds N(l,i)
                                                          J
                                                                , each with J partial
     points (l, i) belonging to the same row (l, i).
                  j


   • The inertia of the cloud NIJ can be expressed as WithinInertia + BetweenIn-
     ertia subclouds N(l,i)
                        J
                            .

                                                                  1Pe
   • The cloud of the centroids of the I partial clouds N(l,i)
                                                         J
                                                               is      Xj . To force
                                                                  J j
     Fs (i) to lie at the centroid of the J partial points Fsj (i), the rows of Xe j,
     called partial, are projected as illustrative but dilated by J.


4.2. Restricted Transition Formulae
     In (23), each addend j is the restricted formula to the columns Kj belonging
to its band. This formula allows us to interpret the position of the partial rows
(l, i)j on the factorial axis s, similarly to the global coordinates:
                                                          !
                                                lj     lj
                               j    1 X fik           f·k
                      Fs (l, i) = √                  − l· Gs (j, k)           (28)
                                    λs
                                    k∈Kj
                                               fi·l·  f··


                                    Revista Colombiana de Estadística 36 (2013) 115–144

130                  Campo Elías Pardo, Mónica Bécue-Bertaut   Jorge Eduardo Ortiz


   Formula (28) indicates that a row (l, i)j is placed on the same side that columns
k ∈ Kj whose profile coordinates obtained from the F table are greater than the
profile coordinates obtained from the margin of its band l. The interpretation of
the superimposed representations is mainly supported by these formulae. In the
graphic representations, the coordinates are amplified by J.
    By exchanging the indices, the restricted transition formulae for the partial
columns are deduced.


4.3. Aids to the interpretation of the Partial Clouds
      In the superimposed representation, for each factorial axis s there are:

   • IJ partial coordinates Fsj (l, i)

   • I global coordinates Fs (l, i)

These points form different projected clouds:

   • I partial clouds N(l,i)
                       J
                             , each with centroid Fs (l, i)

   • J partial clouds NIj

   • L clouds NIl : {Fs (l, i); i ∈ Il }.

    Since the partial rows (l, i)j are illustrative they do not contribute to the inertia
of the axes. For the partial clouds, the aids to the interpretation are defined as
detailed hereafter.


4.3.1. Quality of the Representation of the Partial Clouds

    The quality of representation on axis s of each partial cloud NIj is computed
as the ratio between the projected inertia and the inertia in RK .


4.3.2. Similarity Measure between Partial Clouds

    The total inertia of NIJ can be decomposed into within and between inertia of
clouds N(l,i)
         J
              .
    The ratio BetweenInertia/T otalInertia, computed for each factorial axis s,
is a measure of the proximity of the partial points belonging to the same row and
therefore of the global similarity between the J partial clouds projected on axis s.
If this ratio is close to 1, the homologous points {(l, i)j ; j = 1, . . . , J} are close to
each other and the axis s represents a structure common to the different column
bands (Pagès 2004, pp.8-9).


                                       Revista Colombiana de Estadística 36 (2013) 115–144

Correspondence Analysis of CT with Subpartitions on Rows and Columns                131

4.3.3. Row Contributions to the Within-Inertia

    The within-inertia can be decomposed into the contributions of each row, in
order to detect differences between the several points of view represented by the
column bands. Then, it is possible to identify both the most heterogeneous and
homogeneous, in order to interpret the global relations.
    It is possible to calculate the contribution to the within-inertia of NIJ for the
cloud associated with a partial row N(l,i)
                                        J
                                           .


4.4. Zero Partial Points into the Blocks in ICA versus IBCA
Zero Row Inside a Block: in ICA, if the values of the row (l, i) belonging to a
column band j of the contingency table are zeros, the partial point does not always
                                lj
lie at the origin. In fact: if fik = 0, ∀k ∈ Kj , then fi·lj = 0 but the general term!
                                                                                  lj
                                                               lj    1    f··lj  f·k
of X (18) for the cells of row (l, i) in column band j is xik = l·              − ·j ,
                                                                    f·· f···j    f·k
and this term is not necessarily zero.
    In this case, the interpretation of the superimposed representations becomes
difficult. Some points belonging to null profiles can lie close to points belonging
to non-null profiles.
   IBCA solves this problem because the partial point associated with a row of
                              lj
zeros lies at the origin: as fik = 0; ∀k ∈ Kj then fi·lj = 0, thus the cells of X (25)
belonging to the row (l, i) into the column band j are zeros.


Zero Column Inside a Block: in ICA, if the values of a column (j, k) belonging
to a row band l of the contingency table are zeros, the partial point is not at the
origin, while in IBCA, it is always at the origin. These results can be obtained by
exchanging the indices in the former paragraph.


A Block of Zeros: when all the cells inside block Flj are zeros, the cells of the
model (Clj ) inside the block are also zeros; then, the cells of the block Xlj are
also zeros. In this block, the cells of model Blj are not defined, but this problem
can be solved defining these cells as zeros.


4.5. Outliers
   When few profiles strongly differ from the others, the first axis of the SCA
enhance that difference and might hide the differences among the rest of the points.
In this case, there are two ways to proceed: 1) to observe the differences on
the following axes or 2) to perform the analysis again without the outliers and
eventually project them as illustrative elements. These ways to proceed can be
used in Intra-Tables CA, ICA and IBCA.


                                     Revista Colombiana de Estadística 36 (2013) 115–144

132                 Campo Elías Pardo, Mónica Bécue-Bertaut   Jorge Eduardo Ortiz


5. Example: Colombia Regional Scores for Secondary
   Education Standardized Tests
    The Instituto Colombiano para el fomento de la Educación Superior (ICFES)
performs nation-wide secondary education quality assessment based on public
standardized tests. Schools are classified into seven levels, according to their scores,
ranging from: very inferior, inferior, low, medium, high, superior to very superior.
The first two categories were joined into one named inferior and the last three
into another named high, leaving four levels. Thus, score is a categorical variable
with four levels.
   To illustrate the application of the methods proposed in the first sections, the
schools classification from their scores in the 2008 tests was used, together with
the following information:

   1. School attendance shifts: full day, morning and afternoon including evening,
      Saturdays and Sundays;
   2. The Colombian administrative system: Colombia is divided into 33 depart-
      ments, including Bogotá as capital district. The five departments with less
      than one hundred thousand inhabitants were collapsed to form a “fictitious
      department” named P 01, thus leaving 29 departments.
   3. Population size: the departments are grouped into 5 categories depending
      on their population: P 5 more than two million inhabitants, P 4 between one
      and two million, P 3 between five hundred thousand and one million and P 2
      between one hundred thousand and five hundred thousand. Department P 01
      is included into size-group P 2.

    Our prime objective is the comparison of the departments according to their
schools standardized tests scores. The departments are grouped according to their
population size, since this variable may hide regional differences. The same ratio-
nale leads us to consider the school attendance shifts because, generally, students
attending full day tuition present advantages over their peers attending partial
shifts.
   To achieve the main objective, the contingency table (CT) is structured as
department (group)×score (school attendance shif t) (Table 1). According to the
notations used in the first sections, four factors are considered: A department size-
group, B department, C school attendance shift and D score. Since the depart-
ments are nested into size-groups, the rows have a “true” sub-partition structure.
We have to deal with a CT with I = 29 rows and K = 12 columns. The 29 rows are
the departments divided into L = 4 size groups with I1 = 7, I2 = 8, I3 = 7, I4 = 7,
according to their population.
    The 12 columns correspond to the cross categories of school attendance shif ts×
scores. We consider these 12 columns as divided into J = 3 groups according to
the three school attendance shifts. Each of the 12 blocks corresponds to a subtable
with, in rows, the departments of a given size-group and, in columns, the scores
of a given school attendance shift.


                                      Revista Colombiana de Estadística 36 (2013) 115–144

Correspondence Analysis of CT with Subpartitions on Rows and Columns                      133

    The profile for the Choco department is an outlier, not considered as active in
the analysis. Being located far from the other departments, it is not projected as
illustrative. The table shows the high count of Chocó’ schools classified into an
inferior score. Therefore, the active table has I = 28 departments and I4 = 6.

Table 1: Colombian schools classified by departments, school attendance shift and stan-
         dardized public tests score in 2008.
                                               SCHOOL ATTENDANCE SHIFT
                                    FULL DAY               MORNING            AFTERNOON
   GRO COD. DEPART             infe low med high infe low med high infe low med high
    UP          MENT           rior       ium         rior      ium        rior     ium
         BOG Bogotá               5 40 101 309           9 79 219 241        15 171 179  61
         ANT Antioquia           63 180 116 105         38 105    96    90 125 156    84 29
         VAL Valle               35 93      72    81    51 140 118 132       62 113   55 19
    P5 CUN Cundi.                19 80      81 103      11 90 114       50   40 84    33  7
         ATL Atlántico           31 48      22    37    72 62     48    48 106 61     32 15
         SAN Santander            7 27      51    61    10 40     78    79   30 51    24 20
         BOL Bolívar             31 31       8    25    90 67     28    30   77 59    14 11
         NAR Nariño               8 15      21    16    31 50     63    56   21 33    26 10
         COR Córdoba             18 32      18    11    35 54     16     9   41 38    13  3
         TOL Tolima               8 19      30    26    28 77     57    28   29 40    21  7
    P4 CAU Cauca                 36 56      27     8    24 53     32    24   18 27    13 11
         NSA NorSantander         6 39      20    23    11 40     37    31   31 20    20  7
         BOY Boyacá               6 48      74    40     4 31     52    25   14 39    21  8
         MAG Magdalena           31 19       4     6    58 53     14    12   58 37     6  2
         HUI    Huila             7 37      42    29     1 16     27    12   24 30    14 10
         CAL Caldas              11 37      26    26     8 38     54    21   10 18     8  2
         CES César                0 16       8    11     9 50     23    15   36 37    19  3
         RIS    Risaralda         2 14      14    20     0 25     30    24   12 28    14  5
    P3 MET Meta                   4 12      15     6     7 45     24    19   22 21    10  7
         SUC Sucre                9    6     5     3    29 51     19     9   30 28    10  5
         LAG Guajira              7    6     7     8    12 30      6     7   24 10     3  1
         QUI    Quindio           0    6     7    12     1 17     31    18   10 20     7  1
         CHO Chocó               23    9     6     1    26 10      3     1   20   5    0  0
         CAQ Caquetá              8 10       5     1     2 21     11     7   14   9    5  1
         PUT Putumayo             1    7    10    10     4   6     7     4    4   5    2  0
    P2 CAS Casanare               3 12      10     6     2 16     16     4    8 13     1  1
         ARA Arauca               3    1     5     2     3   7    12     7    7   5    3  1
         GUV Guaviare             0    2     2     0     1   4     1     2    0   2    1  0
         PO1 <100 inh.            6 16       7     2     2   7     3     3    3   4    2  0
   Department size groups (inhabitants in millions): P5: more than two,
         P4: between one and two, P3: between 0.5 and one, P2: less than 0.5.




5.1. Simple CA on the Global Table
    In the factorial planes, each axis inertia and the corresponding percentage in
relation to the global inertia are specified.
    The simple CA total inertia is equal to 0.2648. The first three axes retain
84.2%: 0.15 (59.9%), 0.5 (18.7%) and 0.02 (8.6%). The first two axes retain an
inertia over than the average. According to the sub-partitions structure associated
to the CT, the inertia is decomposed into (see §3.4):




                                        Revista Colombiana de Estadística 36 (2013) 115–144

134                Campo Elías Pardo, Mónica Bécue-Bertaut   Jorge Eduardo Ortiz


   • 0.0062 (2.3%) department group - school attendance shift association;
   • 0.0442 (16.7%) department group - score and department group - perfor-
     mance - school attendance shift associations;
   • 0.0281 (10.6%) department - school attendance shift association;
   • 0.1863 (70.4%) department - score and department - performance - school
     attendance shift associations.

    Figure 3a. shows the representation of the departments, and the size-groups
as illustrative, on the first factorial plane issued from simple CA applied to the
table crossing departments and scores × school attendance shif ts. Figure 3b.
shows the representation of the scores × school attendance shif ts and the school
attendance shifts as illustrative, on the same plane. A Guttman (parabola) effect
is observed, more tidy in the scores trajectories corresponding to full day and
morning shifts. The scores are sorted out on the first axis. The second axis
opposes full day shift (on the positive part) to morning and afternoon shifts (on
the negative part). Since the sub-clouds are not centered on their own centroid,
the second axis opposes departments with a high proportion of full day attendance
schools to departments with a high proportion of morning or afternoon attendance
shifts. The former are mostly concentrated in the less populated size-groups of
departments. This opposition is of no interest in the context of our study.


5.2. Intra-School-Attendance-Shift Analysis
   The Intra-school-attendance-shift CA allows for removing the variability due
to the different profiles of the school-attendance-shifts from one department to
another. In this analysis, the inertia is equal to 0.2143 (80.9% of the simple
CA’s inertia), corresponding basically to the relationship between departments
and scores. The first factorial plane retains 83.4% of the inertia and, according to
the eigenvalue structure, well synthesizes the results of this analysis.
    This analysis differs from the simple CA because of the re-centering of the
school attendance-shift clouds so that their centroids coincide with the global
centroid. In this latter analysis, the departments are more clearly sorted out
depending on their schools scores because the interaction between departments
and school attendance shifts has been eliminated (Figure 4). The Guttman effect
also becomes clearer with this recentering. The departments’ scores seem to be
linked to their population size. The ICA and the IBCA will allow us compare the
scores of the size-groups from an internal point of view.


5.3. ICA and IBCA
    The ICA and IBCA results are very similar with total inertias equal to 0.1863
and 0.1856, respectively (70.4 % and 70.1 % of the simple CA’s inertia). IBCA
main results are described, since they allow for better superimposed representa-
tions (§4.4).


                                    Revista Colombiana de Estadística 36 (2013) 115–144

Correspondence Analysis of CT with Subpartitions on Rows and Columns                                                               135

                0.8          Factor 2: 0.0495 (18.7%)
                                                               po1


                0.6




                0.4
                                                                                             HUI BOY

                                                         CAU            cas
                                                                     p2        CAL
                0.2                                                      ANT       CUN
                                                         caq        guv      put
                                                                         NSA
                                                                   P4
                                           COR                             VAL
                0.0
                                                                 MET P3              RIS
                                                                             P5
                                                                   TOL                 SAN
                                           LAG
                                                                CES    ara
                                                   ATL                            QUI
               −0.2
                         MAG                      SUC                           NAR
                                     BOL
                                                                                                                             BOG
               −0.4
                                                                                            Factor 1: 0.1508 (56.9%)

                      −1.0                        −0.5                        0.0                                  0.5

      a. Departments and centroids of the size-groups: P5 , P4 , P3 y P2 as illustrative.


                0.8           Factor 2: 0.0495 (18.7%)



                0.6

                                                                      Flow


                0.4
                                                                                                      Fmed



                                                                                           full
                0.2
                                           Finf



                                                               Mlow                                  Mmed
                0.0
                                           Ainf                                     Alow
                                                                      afternoon
                                                                        morning
                                                                                             Ahigh                   Fhigh
                                                                                                            Amed
               −0.2
                                                                                                       Mhigh

                              Minf
               −0.4                                                                         Factor 1: 0.1508 (56.9%)

                      −1.0                        −0.5                        0.0                                  0.5

   b. Scores × school attendance shif ts and the school attendance shif ts as illustrative.

       Figure 3: First factorial plane of the Simple Correspondence Analysis.



   Two axes (75.6% of inertia) are retained in the IBCA. Table 2 presents the
aids to interpret sub-clouds for both school attendance and department groups.
The influence of the sub-clouds in the analysis depends on the weight of each band
which is proportional to the percentage of schools that they contain (weight).
    Figure 5 shows the simultaneous global representation of rows and columns
on the IBCA first factorial plane. This graph synthesizes the CT’s analysis. The
departments are sorted out by scores issued from the public standardized tests,
along a parabola. Bogotá obtained the best scores while Bolivar and Magdalena
obtained the worst. Results show that the departments of Bolivar, Magdalena,
Atlántico, La Guajira, Sucre and Cordoba, all from the Caribbean Region, ob-
tained inferior results. Cordoba stands out in this region because it has a greater


                                                           Revista Colombiana de Estadística 36 (2013) 115–144

136                    Campo Elías Pardo, Mónica Bécue-Bertaut   Jorge Eduardo Ortiz

              0.4   Factor 2: 0.0339 (15.8%)                cas
                                          po1                 guv
                                          caq                         BOY
                                                       p2 MET CAL HUI
              0.2
                                                     CES            CUN   QUI
                                            CAU              NSA
                                                     ANT P3             RIS
                                                      P4      VAL
              0.0
                                 COR                  TOL ara put
                                                                           SAN
                                  LAG                       NAR P5
                                    SUC
             −0.2                           ATL
                                                                                                         BOG
                    MAG
                               BOL                                            Factor 1: 0.1449 (67.6%)
             −0.4


                                      −0.5                      0.0                          0.5

              0.4
                     Factor 2: 0.0339 (15.8%)


                                                  Flow
                                                                         Fmed
              0.2
                                                                                      Mmed
                                                     Mlow
                                                                       Alow

              0.0
                                     Ainf
                                                                                     Ahigh   Amed

                      Finf                                                               Mhigh

             −0.2


                                                                                                 Fhigh


             −0.4                                                             Factor 1: 0.1449 (67.6%)
                        Minf


                                     −0.5                        0.0                               0.5
         Figure 4: First factorial plane of the Intra-school-attendance-shift CA.



Table 2: Aids to the interpretation of row and column bands in the IBCA of schools

                               A. School attendance (column bands)
                     Total             Comp1                  Comp2       Plane
                  Cont.Inertia   Cont.Inertia    Cali Cont.Inertia   Cali  Cali Weight
      School day x10000      % x10000       % dad % x10000       % dad % dad %      %
      Full          636 34.3        376 29.0     59.2     153 60.3   24.0  83.2   30.5
      Morning       806 43.4        611 47.0     75.9      90 35.5   11.2  87.0   40.5
      Afternoon     414 22.3        312 24.0     75.3      11   4.2   2.6  77.9   29.0
      Total        1856 100.0      1299 100.0             254 100.0              100.0

                             B. Department groups (row bands)
                 Total             Comp1                Comp2       Plane
              Cont.Inertia  Cont.Inertia   Cali Cont.Inertia   Cali  Cali Weight
       Group x10000      % x10000      % dad % x10000      % dad % dad %      %
       P5      1162 62.6      872 67.1     75.0     197 77.7   17.0  92.0   58.0
       P4       459 24.7      310 23.9     67.5      33 12.9    7.1  74.7   25.2
       P3       179     9.6   108     8.3  60.6      14   5.6   7.9  68.4   13.1
       P2        56     3.0      9    0.7  16.1      10   3.8  17.4  33.5    3.7
       Total   1856 100.0    1299 100.0             254 100.0              100.0




percentage of schools in medium levels. As a rule, the most standing out de-
partments belong to the Andean region. Among the less populated size-group of
departments, Arauca (Llanos Orientales) and Putumayo (Amazonia) stand out.

                                                  Revista Colombiana de Estadística 36 (2013) 115–144

Correspondence Analysis of CT with Subpartitions on Rows and Columns                                                                                                 137

One hypothesis is that these last two departments have succeeded in transferring
part of the oil production royalties to the educational system.

                        Factor 2: 0.0254 (13.7%)
                                                                            Flow

                                                                                                        CUN
           0.2
                                                                                    ANT
                                                                             p01
                                                       full                         CAU    VAL          guv cas        Fmed                              BOY
                                                                             Mlow                 MET
                                                                                                                                        Mmed
                                                                                            CES                 CAL            HUI
                                                                                     caq                         NSA
                                                               afternoon                                Alow                   SAN            QUI
                                                Ainf
           0.0
                                                                                            P5                  TOL                          RIS
                                                                     COR                    P4                                       Mhigh
                         Finf                                                                                                                        Amed
                                                                                                                        NAR
                                          ATL                                               P3                                       Ahigh
                                                  LAG                                       p2
                                                                                                               ara
                                                   SUC
          −0.2
                        BOL
                                  morning                                                                                                                      BOG
                         MAG
                                                                                                                                               Fhigh
                                                                                                                         put
                 Minf

          −0.4
                                                                                                                               Factor 1: 0.1299 (70%)

                  −0.8             −0.6                       −0.4             −0.2               0.0                   0.2                        0.4

Figure 5: First factorial plane of the IBCA for CT department(group) × score(shif t).




5.4. Superimposed Representations in the IBCA
    The first axis is a dispersion axis common to the three partial clouds of depart-
ments (one for each school attendance shift; ratio BetweenInertia/WithinInertia
= 81.1%). Concerning the four score clouds (one for each group of departments,
ratio BetweenInertia/WithinInertia = 46.9%), this axis corresponds both to com-
mon and specific effects of the clouds. On the second axis, only one third of the
inertia corresponds to a common effect to both shift (ratio = 29.9%) and groups
of departemts (ratio = 28.8%) (see §4.3.2).


5.4.1. Departments

    Three partial points correspond to each department in the superimposed rep-
resentations, one for each shift. The global point is the average of those three
points. Figure 6a. shows this representation for the most populated department
group.
    Bolivar is the partial cloud with the greatest dispersion (0.0028 of within in-
ertia), morning shift has the lowest average score among the departments of the
most populated size-group. Table 3 shows that 41.9% of the schools with morning
shifts are classified into the inferior category, more than three times the average
of the most populated departments (12.6%). In Bolivar, the percentages of these
schools classified in medium and high categories are less than half the average.
Bogotá has obtained the best results in all three shifts, being the full day shift the
most outstanding with 67.9% of its schools in high level, over the average equal to
38.7%. Bogotá and Santander are more alike from the morning shift point of view
than for the full day shift. Atlántico and Bolivar’s scores are similar in full day


                                                                           Revista Colombiana de Estadística 36 (2013) 115–144

138                                    Campo Elías Pardo, Mónica Bécue-Bertaut   Jorge Eduardo Ortiz


and afternoon shifts but they differ from the morning shift, with better scores for
Atlántico.


5.4.2. Columns: score(shif t)

    Each global point represents one shift and one score category. The global point
is the centroid of four partial points (one for each group of departments). Figure
6b. shows the superimposed representation of the score categories corresponding
to full day shift (see §4). In this shift, the scores differ mostly from the most
populated departments (P 5 and P 4).

         Factor 2: 0.0254 (13.7%)                                                                                            Factor 2: 0.0254 (13.7%)
                                                  full                                                                                           P5
 0.5

                                                                                morning

                                                                                                                  0.5
                                                                 full
                                                                                                       morning                                                                     P5
                                                      full ANT                 CUN         morning
                                                                                                                        P5
                                      afternoon
                                                                        VAL                                                                                    Flow
                                                                              full
                                               full                                                                                                                                       P4
                                         aftrnoon                    morn
                                                                          afternoonSAN
                                                                 after                                                                                                             Fmed
 0.0                                                                     afternoon                                                                                       P2
                                                                                                                                                                            P3
                                                                                                                                                                                   P4
                                                                                                                  0.0                                                  P4 P3
                                                                                    full                                                                                  P2
                                             ATL                                           afternoon                                             Finf
                                                                                                                                                                      P3
                          BOL                                                                            BOG
                                                                                                                                                                                           Fhigh


                                                                                                                 −0.5
                                                                                                                                          P4
−0.5
                            morning




                                                                                                       full      −1.0

       morning
                                                                    Factor 1: 0.1299 (70%)                                                                                       Factor 1: 0.1299 (70%)     P5



                   −1.0                 −0.5                             0.0                     0.5                         −1.5         −1.0          −0.5               0.0                 0.5    1.0


                 a. The most populated department group                                                                                                  b. Full day shift
           Figure 6: Superimposed representation on the IBCA first factorial plane.




5.5. Separate CA for the 12 Blocks
    ICBA can be considered as a comparison method for the profiles corresponding
to each block. For a given block, the Intra-blocks independence model is the
independence model of the table considered separately. The changes in the IBCA,
in relation to the separate CA of each block, concerning metrics and weights, are
the price that must be paid to have a common reference framework. Figure 7 shows
some of the 12 separate correspondence analyses. The axes have been rotated for
an easier comparison to one another and to IBCA.
   For instance, the planes corresponding to the three shifts in the most populated
departments (P 5) show similar trends that are kept in IBCA.


6. Conclusions
    Various correspondence analyses, useful for the description of contingency ta-
bles with sub-partition structures both in rows and columns were demonstrated.
An extension concerning the theoretical sections presented in Bécue-Bertaut et al.
(2005), was made, putting emphasis on the Double Intra Correspondence Analysis


                                                                                            Revista Colombiana de Estadística 36 (2013) 115–144

Correspondence Analysis of CT with Subpartitions on Rows and Columns                                                                                       139

         Factor 2: 0.0311 (15.2%)              Fmed
 0.2
                                                       SAN
                    Flow                       CUN
                           ANT
                                 VAL
 0.0

                                                                Fhigh            0.4    Factor 2: 0.0279 (13.1%)                       CUN
                                                                        BOG
−0.2                                                                             0.3                                     Mlow
                        ATL                                                      0.2

          Finf                                                                   0.1
                                                                                                                          ANT
−0.4                                                                                                                       VAL                 Mmed
                                                                                 0.0
            BOL                                                                             BOL                                                SAN
                                                                                −0.1                 ATL
−0.6
                                                                                                                                       Mhigh         BOG
          ACS P5−Full                              Factor 1: 0.1715 (83.6%)     −0.2     Minf ACS P5−Morning
                                                                                                                                 Factor 1: 0.18 (84.3%)
                    −0.5                     0.0                0.5                        −1.0            −0.5                  0.0                 0.5
                                                                                  0.3
  0.3
                                                                                         Factor 2: 0.0212 (9.9%)                Flow         NSA
        Factor 2: 0.0129 (7.8%)                                                   0.2
  0.2                              CUN                                                                      CAU
                                        Alow                                      0.1
                                    VAL                                                                                  COR                       HUI
  0.1                                                                             0.0

  0.0                                  ANT                                       −0.1                                                         Fmed       BOY
           BOL                                                Amed                                 Finf
          Ainf                                 SAN                    BOG        −0.2                                                                Fhigh
 −0.1                                                                                                                                        NAR
               ATL                                                                        MAG                                                      TOL
                                                            Ahigh                −0.3
 −0.2
         ACS P5−Afternoon                                                                 ACS P4−Full                      Factor 1: 0.1822 (84.9%)
                                                                                 −0.4
                                                     Factor 1: 0.1471 (89.1%)
                 −0.5                    0.0                    0.5                               −1.0            −0.5                 0.0                 0.5

                              Figure 7: First factorial planes of some separate CA.



or Internal Correspondence Analysis (ICA) (§3.4). The Intra-Block Correspon-
dence Analysis (IBCA) was proposed (§3.5). The Intra-Row Bands and Intra-
Column-Bands CA are particular cases of ICA and IBCA, whenever the sub-
partition structure is considered in one single dimension (§3.4.1 and §3.5.5).
    The decomposition of a simple CA for a CT with sub-partition structure in
rows and columns, presented by Sabatier (1987), was demonstrated, based on the
inertia decomposition of the simple CA into four addends. Thus, the four CA to
each addend were derived (§3.1.2 and Appendix A.2).
   The relation between correspondence analysis and log-linear models applied to
multiple ways contingency tables were used to show the interactions described by
the ICA and IBCA (§3.2.2).
     In the superimposed representation of ICA, some points belonging to null pro-
files, inside a block, which can lie close to points belonging to non-null profiles.
IBCA solves this problem because the partial points belonging to null profiles
which always lay at the origin (§4.4).
    The methods presented in this work were illustrated by their application to the
standardized public test data collected from the Colombian secondary education
students in 2008. IBCA provides, in a synthesized way, the regional differences
between departments regarding the schools scores. The superimposed represen-
tations allow us to compare, on the one hand, the departments scores through
the different shifts and, on the other hand, the score-shifts through the groups of
departments (§5).


Acknowledgements
   We thank both anonymous judges and the Editor in Chief for carefully reading
the article and for their valuable feedback which contributed to its improvement;


                                                                        Revista Colombiana de Estadística 36 (2013) 115–144

140                 Campo Elías Pardo, Mónica Bécue-Bertaut   Jorge Eduardo Ortiz


Professor Jerôme Pagès for his comments about the superimposed representations;
D. Castin for her tidy revision of the English version. This document is derived
from the doctoral thesis in Statistics presented at the Faculty of Science of the Uni-
versidad Nacional de Colombia Sede Bogotá (Pardo 2011), directed and co-directed
by the second and third co-authors respectively. The research was funded by the
Universidad Nacional de Colombia through a study grant. Computation was done
using pamctdp developed in R (R Development Core Team 2010) using functions
of the ade4 package (Thioulouse, Chessel, Dolédec   Olivier 1997). FactoMineR
(Husson, Josse, Le   Mazet 2009) and FactoClass (Pardo   DelCampo 2007)
packages were used for parts of the graphic functions.
                                                                
                Recibido: junio de 2011 — Aceptado: mayo de 2013
Appendix A. Some Proofs
Appendix A.1. Proofs of Formulae (11) and (10), p.122
      The CA inertia can be decomposed as:
                                         2
             lj                   l· ·j
 X         (fik − alj       lj
                   ik ) + (aik − fi· f·k )                 X (f lj − alj )2                 X (alj − f l· f ·j )2
                                                                     ik           ik                 ik        i· ·k
                              ·j
                                                      =                         ·j
                                                                                       +                         ·j
                                                                                                                       +
l,i,j,k
                       fi·l· f·k                          l,i,j,k
                                                                         fi·l· f·k         l,i,j,k
                                                                                                          fi·l· f·k

                                        X (f lj − alj )(alj − f l· f ·j )
                                                 ik        ik       ik        i· ·k
                                   +                                ·j
                                       l,i,j,k
                                                             fi·l· f·k


                                                 Revista Colombiana de Estadística 36 (2013) 115–144

Correspondence Analysis of CT with Subpartitions on Rows and Columns                                                                        143

Then (11) is true if the last addend is equal to zero. We have:

    X (f lj − alj )alj − (f lj − alj )f l· f ·j                                X (f lj − alj )alj                               lj
                                                                                                                                   − alj
                                                                                                                     X
             ik          ik       ik            ik        ik     i· ·k                  ik          ik     ik
                                              ·j
                                                                          =                         ·j
                                                                                                                −             (fik    ik )
  l,i,j,k
                                       fi·l· f·k                              l,i,j,k
                                                                                             fi·l· f·k              l,i,j,k

The last term is zero because the totals of F and A are equal to one another.


Appendix A.2. Decomposition of the Inertia Associated to
              the SCA
    Sabatier, Lebreton   Chessel (1989) demonstrated the decomposition of the
inertia using the correspondence analysis with respect to instrumental variables.
We show the inertia decomposition by expressing F − H as the sum of differences
and using these differences expressed as general terms to calculate the inertia.
Then, each inertia term is associated to a CA.

                        F − H = (F − C) + (AJ − E) + (AL − E) + (E − H)

     The inertia associated to the SCA of F is:

                                                                                                                                           2
                                             lj
 X (f lj − hlj )2                          (fik − clj        J lj    lj        L lj    lj       lj    lj
                                                   ik ) + ((a )ik − eik ) + ((a )ik − eik ) + (eik − hik )
            ik          ik
                                  =
l,i,j,k          hlj
                  ik                                                                    hlj
                                                                                         ik


     X (f lj − clj )2                      X ((aJ )lj − elj )2                  X ((aL )lj − elj )2                    X (elj − hlj )2
                 ik          ik                            ik        ik                         ik         ik                     ik        ik
=                                   +                                     +                                        +
   l,i,j,k            hlj
                       ik
                       l,i,j,k               l,i,j,k       hlj
                                                            ik    l,i,j,k  hlj
                                                                             ik                  hlj
                                                                                                  ik
                                                                              (29)
since all the crossed products are equal to zero. In what follows, the equality to
zero for the last crossed product is proved:

 X ((aL )lj − elj )(elj − hlj )                                 X ((aL )lj − elj )elj                     X ((aL )lj − elj )hlj
                   ik         ik         ik          ik                         ik      ik     ik                         ik           ik   ik
                                                          =                                          −
l,i,j,k                       hlj
                               ik                              l,i,j,k            hlj
                                                                                   ik                    l,i,j,k               hlj
                                                                                                                                ik


The last term is zero because the totals of AL and E are both zero. The other
term is also zero, since:
                                             l· ·j lj
                                       lj fi· f·k f··
                         ((aL )lj
                               ik −  e ik )
                                             f···j f··l·   X f l· X
                                                                           ((aL )lj    lj
                  X
                                                                   ··
                                     l· f ·j
                                                         =       ·j l·           ik − eik ) = 0
                 l,i,j,k
                                   fi· ·k                  l,j
                                                               f    f
                                                                 ·· ·· i,k


Now, the CA associated to the inertias contained in the formula can be seen (29):

    1. CA(F, C), i.e, ICA(F).


                                                                 Revista Colombiana de Estadística 36 (2013) 115–144

144                        Campo Elías Pardo, Mónica Bécue-Bertaut   Jorge Eduardo Ortiz


  2. CA(AJ , E), but the expression can be reduced adding over k:
                                                                         !2                                             !2
                                            ·j                 ·j lj
                                     fi·lj f·k          fi·l· f·k f··                                      f l· f··lj
                                                 −                                              fi·lj − i· l·
                          X            f···j              f··l· f···j               X                        fi·
                                                        ·j
                                                                                =
                         l,i,j,k
                                                 fi·l· f·k                          l,i,j
                                                                                                      fi·l· f···j

        We note TJ the table of dimension I × J and with general term fi·lj , this
        inertia is associated to the Intra-Tables CA of TJ .
  3. We can obtain an analogous result if we add on the subscript i, i.e. the
     CA(AL , E) is the Intra-Tables CA of TL , with dimension L × K and general
           lj
     term f·k .
  4. The last addend is associated to the CA(E, H). In this case, it is possible to
     add to both subscripts i and k:
                                                                           !2
                                              ·j lj
                                       fi·l· f·k f··               ·j
                                                          − fi·l· f·k
                            X             f··l· f···j                                 X (f··lj − f l· f···j )2
                                                                                                             ··
                                                          ·j
                                                                                  =
                           l,i,j,k
                                                   fi·l· f·k                            l,j
                                                                                                      f··l· f···j

        This inertia is associated to the SCA of T, with dimension L × J and general
        term f··lj , i.e. the table formed by the totals of the blocks (l, j).


Appendix A.3. Proof of Formula (23), p.126
    The coordinate of the row point over the s-axis, as a function of the coordinates
of the column points is (Escofier 1984):
                                                       !
                                            lj
                                  1 X fik        clj
                     Fs (l, i) = √              − ik     Gs (j, k)
                                   λs j,k fi·l·  fi·l·

Replacing clj ik (Formula (19), p.124), three sums appear but the two last are zero,
because the coordinates Gs (j, k) from each subcloud NKj are centered with the
        f ·j
weights ·k    :
        f···j
                        X f ·j                                              X f··lj X f ·j
                fi·lj
          X
                              ·k                                                                       ·k
                                 G (j, k) = 0
                               ·j s
                                                               and                                          Gs (j, k) = 0
            j           k∈Kj
                             f··                                              j
                                                                                    f··l·         f ·j
                                                                                              k∈Kj ··

then,                                                                                   !
                                                                         lj      lj
                                          1 X                           fik     f·k
                             Fs (l, i) = √                                    −               Gs (j, k)
                                           λs j,k                       fi·l·   f··l·




                                                          Revista Colombiana de Estadística 36 (2013) 115–144


References
Bécue-Bertaut M, Pagès J. A principal axes method for comparing multiple contingency tables: MFACT.(2004). Computational Statistics and Data Analysis.
Bécue-Bertaut M, Pagès J P, C. Contingency table with a double partition on rows and columns  Visualization and comparison of the partial and global structures.(2005). Applied Stochastic Models and Data Analysis.
Cailliez F, Pagès J. Introduction à l’Analyse des Données.(1976). Smash.
Cazes P, Chessel D, Doledec S. L’analyse des correspondances internes d’un tableau partitionné - Son usage en hydrobiologie.(1988). Revue de Statistique Appliquée.
Dolédec S, Chessel D. Recent developments in linear ordination methods for environmental sciences.(1991). Advances in Ecology.
Escofier B. Generalisation de l’analyse des correspondances a la comparaison de tableaux de frequence Rapports de Recherche 207.(1983). Institut National de Recherche en Informatique et en Automatique Centre de Rennes IRISA.
Escofier B. Analyse factorielle en référence à un modèle - Application à l’analyse de tableaux d’échanges’.(1984). Revue de Statistique Appliquée.
Escofier B. Analyse des Correspondances - Recherches au Coeur de l’Analyse des Données.(2003). Presses Universitaires de Rennes - Société Francaise de Statistique.
Escofier B, Pagès J. Análisis Factoriales Simples y Múltiples - Objetivos Métodos e Interpretación.(1992). Universidad del País Vasco.
Escofier B, Pagès J. Comparaison de groupes de variables définies sur le même ensemble d’individus.(1982). Rapports de Recherche 149 INRIA-IRISA.
Husson F, Josse J, Le S, Mazet J. FactoMineR: Factor Analysis and Data Mining with R.().R package.
Laloë D, Moazami-Gourdarzi K, Chessel D. Contribution of individual markers to the analysis of the relationships among breeds by correspondence analysis.(2002).Congress on Genetics Applied to Livestock Production.
Lebart L, Morineau A, Warwick. Multivariate Descriptive Statistical Analysis.(1984). Wiley.
Lebart L, Piron M, Morineau A. Statistique exploratoire multidimensionnelle - Visualisation et inférence en fouilles de données 4 edn. (2006). Dunod.
Lobry J, Necsulea A. Synonymous codon usage and its potential link with optimal growth temperature in prokaryotes.(2006). Gene.
Lobry J R, Chessel D. Internal Correspondence Analysis of Codon and Amino-Acid Usage in Thermophilic Bacteria.(2003). Journal of Applied Genetics.
Pagès J. Multiple Factor Analysis: Main Features and Application to Sensory Data.(2004). Revista Colombiana de Estadística.
Pagès J, Bécue-Bertaut M. Multiple Factor Analysis for Contingency Tables in M Greenacre J Blasius eds Multiple Correspondence Analysis and Related Methods.(2006). Chapman and Hall/CRC.
Pardo C, DelCampo P. Combinacion de metodos factoriales y de analisis de conglomerados en r: el paquete factoclass.(2007). Revista Colombiana de Estadistica. *www.matematicas.unal.edu.co/revcoles
Pardo C, E. Métodos en ejes principales para tablas de contingencia con estructuras de partición en filas y columnas - Tesis para optar al título de Doctor en Ciencias-Estadística.(2011). Universidad Nacional de Colombia.
R Development Core Team. R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing.(2010). R Foundation for Statistical Computing.
Ramírez J R, Martínez G. Analisis de correspondencia a partir de una muestra probabilistica.(2010). Revista Colombiana de Estadística.
Sabatier R.Methodes factorielles en analyse des données: aproximations et prise en compte de variables concomitantes.(1987). Universitedes Sciences et Techniques du Languedoc.
Sabatier R, Lebreton J, Chessel D. Principal Component Analysis with Instrumental Variables as a Tool for Modelling Composition Data in R Coppi S Bolasco eds Multiway Data Analysis.(1989). Elsevier.
Tenenhaus M, Young F. An Analysis and Synthesis of Multiple Correspondence Analysis Optimal Scaling Homogeneity Analysis and other Methods for Quantifying Categorical Multivariate Data.(1985). Psychometrika.
Thioulouse J, Chessel D, Dolédec S, Olivier J. ADE-4: a multivariate analysis and graphical display software.(1997). Statistical and Computing.
Van der Heijden P.  Correspondence Analysis of Longitudinal Categorical Data.(1987). DSWO Press Leiden.
Van der Heijden P, de Falguerolles A, de Leeuw J. A combined approach to contingency table analysis using correspondence analysis and log-linear analysis.(1989).Applied Statistics.
