Estimating dynamic Panel data. A practical approach to perform long panels. Estimando Datos de panel dinámicos. Un enfoque práctico para abordar paneles largos
Universidad de Talca, Talca, Chile. Universidad Europea de Madrid, Madrid, España
Abstract
Panel data methodology is one of the most popular tools for quantitative analysis in the eld of social sciences, particularly on topics related to economics and business. This technique allows simultaneously addressing individual eects, numerous periods, and in turn, the endogeneity of the model or independent regressors. Despite these advantages, there are several methodological and practical limitations to perform estimations using this tool. There are two types of models that can be estimated with Panel data: Static and Dynamic, the former is the most developed while dynamic models still have some theoretical and practical constraints. This paper focuses precisely on the latter, Dynamic panel data, using an approach that combines theory and praxis, and paying special attention on its applicability on macroeonomic data, specially datasets with a long period of time and a small number of individuals, also called long panels.
Key words Dynamic Panels; Endogenous Models; Overidentication; Panel Data; Stata; xtabond2.
Resumen
La metodología de Datos de Panel es una de las técnicas más usadas para realizar análisis cuantitativos en el ámbito de las ciencias sociales, especialmente en temas relacionados con la economía y los negocios. Su riqueza reside en que esta técnica permite trabajar con varios periodos de tiempo, incorporar los efectos individuales, y a su vez, tratar la endogeneidad. A pesar de estas ventajas, existen diversos obstáculos para su implementación, tanto metodológicos como operativos. Dentro de los tipos de modelos que se pueden estimar con Datos de Panel, los de carácter estáticos han sido los más desarrollados, persistiendo aún carencias teórico-prácticas para los modelos dinámicos. Este artículo pone precisamente su énfasis en estos últimos, aplicando un enfoque que conjuga la teoría y la praxis, y prestando especial atención a su aplicabilidad para datos macroeconómicos, fundamentalmente para paneles que poseen un período de tiempo largo y un número de individuos pequeño.
Palabras clave : datos de panel; datos de panel dinámicos; modelos endógenos; sobreidenticación; stata; xtabond2.



1. Introduction


     Studies on Panel data methodology began in the XIX answering new questions
that Pool data analysis or Time series could not directly solve. The rst works on
this methodology was focused on lineal regressions and static models, where x and
random eects were determined assuming a xed temporal eect without paying
enough attention to endogenous relationships.         To analyse these interactions, a
new tool was developed in the XX: Dynamic models; Balestra & Nerlove (1966),
Nerlove (1971), Maddala (1971, 1975) are some of the rst works. Finally, in the
70's, empirical studies on dynamic panel data began to be published in specialized
journals.

     Dynamic Panel data methodology oers some advantages in comparison to the
Static version. The possibility to address the heterogeneity of the individuals and
also the use of several instrumental variables in order to deal with the endogeneity
of the variables of the model, also known as lagged variables. Moreover, along
with the estimation of models with endogenous variables, it is possible to perform
more sophisticated models (Ruíz-Porras 2012). However, dynamic panel data also
has some weaknesses. First, estimators can be unstable and the reported values
could depend on characteristics of the sample. Also, the use of lagged variables
not necessarily can deal with serial correlation problems (Pérez-López 2008). In
addition, it is complex to nd appropriately instruments to some endogenous re-
gressors when only weak instruments are available. Nevertheless, one of the main
limitations of this methodology is the analysis for long time periods (long t) and
few individuals (short n), which could result in the overidentication of the model
(Ruíz-Porras 2012).

     Several empirical studies on the eld of Economy are using databases with
long time periods and small number of individuals, for example when researcher
try to understand the eect of key factors on performance of companies, industries
or territories. In order to built these models, previous authors have proposed to
treat the equations from the dierent cross section units as a system of seemingly
unrelated regression equations (SURE) and then estimate the system by gener-
alized least squares (GLS) techniques (Pesaran 2006), while others assume Panel
data as a more adequate methodology to deal with these estimations. This fact



                                         Revista Colombiana de Estadística 41 (2018) 3152

Estimating dynamic Panel data. A practical approach to perform long panels          33



is the main target of this article, which provides some alternatives to face this
situation and estimate dynamic models with long panels (long t and short n).

   During the nineties, studies of endogenous models using dynamic panel data
(DPD) were usual and some works on this methodology were carried out. Rele-
vant contributions on DPD by Arellano & Bond (1991), Arellano & Bover (1995),
Blundell & Bond (1998) and Roodman (2009) were provided in order to improve
the understanding of the complex economic processes by empirical researches. Al-
though, it has been more than thirty years from the rst works, this technique still
has some open questions. Thus, the purpose of this article is to guide the reader
in the use of dynamic panel data and provide some clues to solve limitations when
panels are formed by a long t and short n. This restriction is addressed by using
Stata, and solutions are oered in this text.

   The paper is made up of four sections.       The next section oers a review on
Dynamic Panel Data including the models to be analyzed by using this method-
ology. Then, a detailed description about how estimate long panels is included.
The fourth section includes examples of endogenous model estimates using Stata.
Finally, remarked conclusions are provided.




2. Review on Dynamic Panel Data


2.1. Evolution and Advance on Panel Data Methodology
   In the last fty years, Panel data methodology has become one of the most
popular tools for empirical studies in dierent elds of knowledge. There has been
an important progress in the knowledge for static models, but in the dynamic
version still remain some theoretical and practical constraints.     The purpose of
this paper is to provide some clues and recommendations for the use of dynamic
panel data, specically for the performing of endogenous models with long panels.
Panel data is a statistical tool to perform models using a number of individuals
(companies, countries, households, etc.)    across a dened period of time.       This
technique diers from cross-sectional analysis, which is used to perform an analysis
of several individuals at a specic point in time, and the methodology of time
series, which corresponds to the analysis of the same individual across time. Thus,
the use of panel data requires two conditions: data from dierent individuals (n)
collected over time (t). In addition to these conditions, restrictions may also arise
due to the number of observations and the relationship between n and t.           The
recommendation to perform a model with panel data is to use a large number of
individuals (n) and a small period of time (t), in order to have adequate degrees
of freedom and avoid overidentication.

   This methodology has been used more frequently in studies at rm level, be-
cause databases usually have a large number (n) of observations in a short period
of time (t).   This condition oers the advantage of capturing the variability of
the phenomenon, through observation of a large number of cases. At an aggre-
gate level (e.g.: countries, regions, sectors, etc.), whose databases frequently have
a small   n/t relationship, even less than 1, some serious diculties arise when


                                      Revista Colombiana de Estadística 41 (2018) 3152

34                                                  Romilio Labra & Celia Torrecillas

studies of endogenous models are carried out. Figure 1 shows an example com-
paring OLS and Panel analysis where the individuals eect has been taken into
account providing a better adjustment and thus, improving the explanatory ca-
pacity. Dierent results (models) are obtained in the example when the models
are performed by OLS or Panel.      The above is a consequence of individual ef-
fects, which can be assumed by panel data methodology. In fact, individual eects
(dashed line) generate a greater slope of the function than OLS estimating (solid
line) and better adjusting the model to the observed data, improving the explana-
tory capacity.




          Figure 1: Model estimates by OLS and Panel data methodologies.

     As it has been mentioned above, there are two main types of Panel data. Static
panels, used to estimate static models, and Dynamic panels, more suitable to
perform endogenous models. Static panels can be classied into models with xed
or random eects, depending on how they consider the individual eects, assuming
in both cases these eects as constant over time. The above restriction makes static
models limited to consider the dynamics of time-varying, or the endogeneity. On
the contrary, dynamic panel data allow us to treat endogeneity of variables and
model.

     From an evolutionary perspective, Nelson & Winter (1982) and Dosi (1988)
indicated that endogenous models are highly dependent on the past and its accu-
mulative process. Dynamic panels allow including an endogenous structure into
the model through instrumental variables. This endogeneity is dened as the ex-
istence of correlation between the dependent variable and the error term, which
is related to the causal relationship between the variables explainin the model
(Mileva 2007, Wooldridge 2013), inadequate data quality, autoregression and au-
tocorrelated errors and/or omission of relevant variables. In economic terms, en-
dogeneity can be interpreted as the eect of the past on the present, both on the
model (dependent variable) and on the independent variables, or as the causality
relationship between regressors and explained variable along the time.



                                      Revista Colombiana de Estadística 41 (2018) 3152

Estimating dynamic Panel data. A practical approach to perform long panels           35



    The inclusion of the dependent variable as regressor, consistent with the work
reported by classical authors such as Arellano & Bond (1991), Arellano & Bover
(1995) and Blundell & Bond (1998), is performed by using lagged endogenous
terms as a way to avoid the correlation problems between variables, dening (Y ) :
Y(it−n) .
    The second term of the function (regressors) corresponds to the lag of depen-
dent variable (Y(it−n) ) plus the independent variables (Xit) . Due to the causality
is related to time, the regressor is included as the lag of Y(it)


                             Yit = αYit−n + βi Xit + ωit                            (1)



    Where:
Yit : dependent variable of individuals i in time t
Yit−n : lag of dependent variable. Individuals i en time t − 1
α : constant
βi : coecient of variable i
Xit : independent variable i in time t
ωit : εi + µit

    In addition, not only the lagged variables can be used as instruments of endoge-
nous variables, but also others independent variables correlated to the regressor
target but not correlated to the error term of the model. In general, these types
of instruments are not very easy to detect, and many times they can be not com-
pletely correlated to the endogenous variable.




2.2. Types of Dynamic Panel data
    The evolution in the analysis of dynamic Panel data and the building of esti-
mators, have introduced new possibilities for the analysis of endogenous models.
These models have been specially focused on the econometric analysis of the en-
dogeneity.

    Two main ways have been developed to address the endogeneity in the models,
in addition to traditional instrumental variables; the rst one, is to build instru-
mental variables in levels, while a second choice corresponds to the generation of
those variables but in dierences. However, even when the literature has showed
advances in these analysis, there are some diculties in the application of the
dynamic panel data. This is particularly discussed in this document.



2.2.1. Dynamic Panel Functions: Instrumental Variables in Dierences
       and Levels
    The rst method for the treatment of the endogeneity problem uses the instru-
mental variables obtained through lags of the endogenous variables. Depending
on the estimator used, these lags may be applied in dierences or levels.          The
dierences between both methods will be expressed in the following equations:



                                       Revista Colombiana de Estadística 41 (2018) 3152

36                                                     Romilio Labra & Celia Torrecillas

     Instrument in dierences:


                                  X(t−n) − X(t−(n−1))                                 (2)


     Instrument in levels:
                                         X(t−n)                                       (3)


     The use of instruments in dierences or levels is expressed in the following
equations:

     Equations in dierences:


                                  ∆Yt−1 = Yt−2 − Yt−1                                 (4)


     Equations in levels:


                               Yt = Yt−1 ; Yt−(n−1) = Yt−n                            (5)


     Where, Yt−n is the instrument of Yt−(n−1)

     Considering the building of instruments in dynamic panel data, it is possible
to nd dierent estimators:

     The rst one was developed by Arellano and Bond in 1991 (Arellano & Bond
1991). It is known as Dierence GMM, because this estimator uses as instruments
the lags in dierences.

     Latter, it was developed the estimator that uses as instrumental variables the
lags in dierences and levels. This change allowed to work with panel data com-
posed by a small period of time, and therefore with a small number of instruments.
It is known as System GMM and it was developed by (Arellano & Bover 1995).

     A third estimator was developed by Roodman (2006). It is called xtabond2.
This estimator follows the same logic that System GMM, but it introduces more
options in the used of the instruments. In addition, xtabond2 allows us to work
separately the endogeneity of the dependent or independent variables.

     As we have mentioned, System GMM uses the instruments in level and dier-
ences. The equations that allow its calculation are as follows:

     Equations in dierences and levels. System GMM


                                Yit = αi,t−1 + βXit + εit                             (6)




                                      εit = µi + ϑit                                  (7)



                             E(ui ) = E(ϑit ) = E(µi ϑit ) = 0                        (8)


     Yit is the dependent variable of i (individual) in t (period of time)
     Xit is the independent variable of i (individual) in t (period of time).



                                         Revista Colombiana de Estadística 41 (2018) 3152

Estimating dynamic Panel data. A practical approach to perform long panels          37



   The error term εit has two orthogonal components:

    µi = xed eects
ϑit = idiosyncratic shocks

   The use of dynamic panel data in dierences (Dierence GMM) and system
(System GMM) requires dierent commands in Stata:

   xtbond (Arellano & Bond 1991). This command uses as instrumental variable
the lags of endogenous variable in dierences (Dierence GMM).

   xtdpdsys (Arellano & Bover 1995). This command uses as instrumental vari-
ables of endogenous variable the lags in dierences and levels (Dierence and
System GMM)

   xtabond2 (Roodman 2006).       Similarly to xtdpdsys, it uses the instrumental
variables of endogenous variable as lags in levels and dierences. This is not an
ocial command in Stata, but it is an option given by Roodman (2006).

   xtdpd.   It is used for the regression of endogenous variables as instruments
in dierences or levels. According to Cameron & Trivedi (2009), the use of this
command will allow to correct the model of the average moving, being detected
by the Arellano and Bond Test (Autocorrelation of second order).

   In addition, the estimators mentioned above, allow us to do the analysis through
two alternatives: One step and Two steps, depending on if the weight matrix is
homocedastic or heterocedastic. Literature indicates that Two steps estimators are
more ecient; therefore it is recommendable the use of the heterocedastic matrix
in this type of estimations.

   One step: It uses only the homocedastic weight matrix for the estimation. Two
steps: It uses the heterocedastic weight matrix for the estimation.

   The dierentiation between these alternatives is the key for the determination
of overidentication in a dynamic model, as we will analyzed in the next section.




2.2.2. Main Issues in the Estimation of Dynamic Panel data Using
       GMM
   The utilization of GMM in the estimation has two main issues: the proliferation
of instruments and the serial autocorrelation of errors. These two issues will be
higher when the panel used is made up by a sample with a big period of time and
reduced number of individuals.

   The proliferation of instruments refers to the existence of a higher level of
instruments. This will cause overidentication in the model as a consequence of the
generation of instrumental variables in dierences and levels (with the exception
of the Arellano and Bond estimator that only uses as instrumental variables lags
in dierences). In order to check if the number of instruments is adequated and it
doesn't produce overidentication, there are two tests available: Sargan test and
Hansen test (both tests are explained in section 4.4) (Sargan 1958).



                                      Revista Colombiana de Estadística 41 (2018) 3152

38                                                   Romilio Labra & Celia Torrecillas

     The dynamic panel data requires that the error cannot be serially correlated:
This condition of the serial autocorrelation of errors can be avoided using the
Arellano and Bond test (this is explained in section 4.4.3).




3. Estimating Dynamic Models Using Macro Data

      and Long Panels

     Panel data are part of the techniques available to perform models from databases
formed by a small number of individuals observed in a long time. However, the
length of T (time) and N (individuals) could change according to the research
analysis which could produce uncorrected results in the estimations. Therefore in
order to deal with the length of N and T, some authors have pointed out some
ideas that can help in dealing with these dierences. In what follows we present
approaches for the following scenarios: 1) N small, T large; 2) N and T large; 3)
N small, T large.

     Previous authors propose to treat the equations from the dierent cross section
units as a system of seemingly unrelated regression equations (SURE) and then
estimate the system by generalized least squares (GLS) techniques (Pesaran 2006).
Specically when N is small relative to T and the error are uncorrelated with the
regressors crossection dependence can be modelled using SURE (Chudik, Pesaran
& Tosetti 2011).

     Although Pesaran (2006) pointed out some ideas for dealing with dierent size
of N and T, the proposal is not totally appropriate when both N and T are large,
as it is the case of countries studies.   For N and T large some authors propose
restricting the covariance matrix of the error using a common factor specication
with a xed number of unobserved factors (Hoechile 1933, Phillips & Sul 2003).
However, some econometric error occurs when N is large. For that reason, Pesaran
(2006) proposed to apply the Common Correlated Eect estimators (CCE) when
N and T tend to innite.

     However, is quite common to have a small N and a large T. In this case, four
solutions have been proposed; 1)Running a separate regression for each group and
averaging the coecient over groups.      2) Combine the data dening a common
slope, allowing for xed or random intercepts and estimating pooled regressions
(Mairesse & Griliches 1988). 3) Take the data average over group and estimate
the aggregate time series regressions (Pesaran, Pierse & Kumar 1989, Lee, Pesaran
& Pierse 1990).     Finally, 4) Averaging the data over time and estimating cross
section regression on group means (Barro 1991). The solutions mentioned above
present some limitations. The group mean estimator obtained by the average of
the coecients for each group is consistent for large N and T, but the pooled
and aggregate estimators are not consistent in dynamic models and there is a bias
(Pesaran & Smith 1995).

     Another approach deals with databases formed by small N and large T using
Panel data methodology as solution to this condition (N small in comparison to
T). This work is along this line of research.



                                       Revista Colombiana de Estadística 41 (2018) 3152

Estimating dynamic Panel data. A practical approach to perform long panels               39



   The use of large number of individuals and short period of time is the most
common type of data in dynamic panel analysis. It is called          Short panels . The
literature does not specify a number of individuals (n) or time (t) to classify the
panels as long or short. However some authors have indicated the following rule:
a suitable n could be greater than 100, while the t should not exceed 15 periods,
and ideally it should be less than 10, if the target is to estimate dynamic models
with panel data (Roodman 2009).           This is the case of several studies based on
databases compiled from surveys such as CIS (Community Innovation Survey),
PITEC (Panel of Technological Innovation, Spain), national surveys of innovation
and others databases of companies and citizens provided by national and interna-
tional organizations.

   When we try to estimate dynamic models with panels conformed by n rela-
tively small (n < 100) and t large (t > 15), using lags of variables as instruments
of endogenous terms, we nd additional diculties due to the panel data struc-
ture and the way of instrumental variable generation. This fact is caused by the
incorporation of lags of endogenous variable as its instrument(s), which must be
correlated to the endogenous regressor and E(µ|x) = 0.             This alternative of in-
struments (lags of endogenous variables) resolves the problem nding a suitable
instrument to endogenous regressors.

   Anderson & Hsiao (1981), Arellano & Bond (1991) and Arellano & Bover (1995)
have demonstrated the importance of lags as instruments, and the relevance to
estimate dynamic models. Nevertheless, when using long panels an important ob-
stacle emerges: the proliferation of instruments (Roodman 2009). This is because
the number of instruments to be generated is directly related to the length of the
panel (number of periods). For example, for a variable with t = 5, the number of
potential instruments is 12 (from equations in dierences and 3 from equation in
levels) when we use GMM methodology.

   In the case of equations in dierences, the number of instruments is dened as
follows:

   Function:
                               ∆Yit = δ∆Yi(t−i) + ∆εit                                  (9)


   Instruments:
                                 Yi1 , Yi2 , . . . . . . , Yit−2                       (10)


   If there are one or more endogenous variables, the number of instruments
increases even more, as each regressor is instrumentalized by all their dierences
and levels (with GMM). This proliferation of instruments, initially was seen as
favorable, since it increased the eciency of the estimator (Arellano & Bond 1991),
however, it causes an    overidentication of the model, mainly when the number
of degrees of freedom is small, e.g. when there are few individuals. Therefore, as
the panel grows in periods and decreases on number of individuals, the probability
of overidentication increases. In Table 1 we show a brief summary of the main
problems that arise with the use of panel analysis.




                                           Revista Colombiana de Estadística 41 (2018) 3152

40                                                                Romilio Labra & Celia Torrecillas

Table 1: Main obstacles found in the estimation of DPD considering the number of
         individuals (n) and period (t).
                                         Number of individuals (n)
                                          High                         Low

                                High      Low probability of           High probability of
Period of time (t)



                                          overidentication            overidentication

                                Low       Normal condition of panel    The number of observations
                                                                       can be insucient to perform
                                                                       the model



                 In order to solve the overidentication problem, Roodman (2009) conducted
a detailed analysis and proposed mechanisms to adequately test the existence of
excess of instruments, through the Sargan and Hansen tests.                      According to the
author, Sargan test is adequate when the estimation is performed considering
an homoscedastic weight matrix, as is the case of the                   One step option. With
Stata, the command to run this test is                 estat Sargan and it is available as a model
postestimation.

                 The null hypothesis:

                 H0 = overidentication restrictions apply
                 Meanwhile, the Hansen test detects overidentication in presence of an hetero-
cedastic matrix. This is the case when using the                Two step and vce(robust) options.
This test is directly reported when it is used the estimator               xtabond2 in Stata.
                 The null hypothesis of this test the same as the Sargan test, because both are
identifying the existence of instrument excesses.

                 H0 = overidentication restrictions apply.
                 In order to avoid an overidentication of the model, the number of individuals
or groups must be greater than the number of instruments used. Therefore, reduc-
ing the number of instruments becomes a necessary condition when we use long
panels. The literature shows various alternatives to solve this problem depending
on the nature of the model, the purpose of the analysis, the length of the panel and
the characteristics of the variables. The rst alternative is to reduce t, dividing
the analysis into two sections (two separate models). Other possibility is to group
the periods (e.g. using biennia, trienniums or others). However, these options are
limited, because they reduce the information available for the analysis, aecting
the variance.

                 Another alternative is to reduce the instruments through the restriction of lags.
As an endogenous model is specied incorporating the lag(s) of the independent
variable (Y) as regressor(s), it is common to limit to one or two the periods (lags),
that is Y(t−1) and Y(t−2) (commonly known as L1 and L2, respectively).                         If we
suspect of a delayed (endogenous) eect, it is recommended to add more lags, a
situation that can be oset by the elimination of those closest to t0 due to each L
(lag of each endogenous regressors) incorporates more instruments.



                                                    Revista Colombiana de Estadística 41 (2018) 3152

Estimating dynamic Panel data. A practical approach to perform long panels           41



   It is also possible to reduce the generation of instrumental variables, either lag
of Y or endogenous regressors, using only equations in dierences or levels.         In
addition, if we need to further reduce these types of variables, we can restrict lags
of each variable to a value between t − 1 and tn , in other words, to estimate the
model using as instruments only those generated for a time interval and not for
the entire period of the panel.

   In order to select the option to reduce the number of instrument, some criteria
are proposed:


   • Sample characteristics.
         Number of individuals (n)
         Time periods (t)
   • Literature review on characteristics of model (endogenous or not) and the
     regressors.


   • Serial correlation between model's errors
   • Overidentication. In order to manage many instruments it is required more
     than one alternative to limit them.


   In endogenous models, in addition to the overidentication discussed above,
additional drawbacks related to the serial second-order autocorrelation of residues
can arise, indicating that the instrument used is not consistent. Given this limita-
tion, we constantly need to test instrument variables in order to dene the most
appropriate regressor, because even when the number is suitable, can remain the
serial autocorrelation inconvenient.   To identify whether or not autocorrelation,
Arellano and Bond test should be used, as follows:

   Arellano and Bond test.
   The null hypothesis is:


   • Ho: There not exist autocorrelation.
   • Stata by default delivers results for the order 1 and 2 (Ar (1) and Ar (2)).
     When Arellano and Bond test indicates that there is serial correlation in
     both levels, probably we are facing a unit root model.


   Finally, we show some examples of applications where Panel data was used with
small N and large T: in: Roodman (2009), Labra & Torrecillas (2014), Álvarez &
Labra (2014), Torrecillas, Fischer & Sánchez (2017), Santos-Arteaga, Torrecillas
& Tavana (2017).




                                       Revista Colombiana de Estadística 41 (2018) 3152

42                                                     Romilio Labra & Celia Torrecillas

4. Modeling Endogenous Functions With Panel Data:
                          1
     Step by Step

     This section contains the syntax for the use of dynamic panel data in Stata
and the interpretation of the set of estimators:    xtabond, xtdpdsys and xtabond2.

4.1. xtabond Estimators (Instrumental Variables used in
     Dierences)
     To perform a regression using   xtabond we will distinguish between models with
endogenous, exogenous and/or predetermined variables.



4.1.1. Models with exogenous independent variables.
     Step 1

    xtabond vardep var1 var2 var3 varn, lags(#) twostep.
estat sargan
     Step 2

    xtabond vardep var1 var2 var3, varn, lags(#) vce(robust) twostep.
estat abond.
     Where, var1, var2, var3 and var n, are independent exogenous variables.

     Firstly, we should do the estimation without the     vce(robust) option, and then
apply the Sargan test (this test only works without this option).

     The order in the syntax will be as follows: xtabond indicates to Stata that
you are using dynamic panel data, then, the dependent variable (vardep) has to
be written, and later the independent exogenous variables (in the example: var1,
var2, var3 and var n). Finally, after the comma and with the expression lags, you
should introduce the number of lags of the dependent variable as regressor.

     Secondly, the model is estimated with the option vce(robust). After this op-
tion we will add the Arellano and Bond test to determine the existence of serial
autocorrelation or not (estat abond).



4.1.2. Models with Predetermined Independent Variables
     Step 1

   xtabond vardepend var1 var2 var3, lags(#)twostep pre (var4, va5, lagstruc-
tur(#,#)) estat sargan
     Step 2

    xtabond vardepend var1 var2 var3, lags(#) twostep vce(robust) pre(var4, var5,
lagstructur(#,#)) estat abond
  1 Some examples for the application of this model with Stata are included in Labra and
Torrecillas (2014)


                                         Revista Colombiana de Estadística 41 (2018) 3152

Estimating dynamic Panel data. A practical approach to perform long panels           43



   Where, var1, var2 y var3, are exogenous independent variables and var4, var5
are predetermined independent variables, which is indicated with the following
expression: pre(var4 y var5).

   In order to indicate to Stata the use of independent variables as predetermined,
we use the following syntax after the comma: pre (     var4, var5, lagstructur(#,#)).
Inside the parentheses we will introduce the predetermined variables (in the exam-
ples var4 y var5) and the limitations of the lags (   lagstructur(#,#)). The rst #
indicates the number of lags introduced in the model, and the second # indicates
the maximum quantity of lags.



4.1.3. Models With Endogenous Independent Variables
   Step 1

    xtabond vardepend var1 var2 var3, lags(#)twostep endog (var6, va7, lagstruc-
tur(#,#))
estat sargan
   Step 2

   xtabond vardepend var1 var2 var3, lags(#) twostep vce(robust)
endog(var6, var7, lagstructur(#,#)) estat abond
   Where: var1, var2 y var3 are exogenous independent variables and var6 and
var7 are independent endogenous variables (endog(var6, var7)) In order to indicate
to Stata that the variables are endogenous we will use the following syntax after
the comma: endog(     var6, var7, lagstructur(#,#)). Inside the parentheses we will
introduce the endogenous variables and the limitations for the lags.



4.1.4. Other Combinations of the Variables
   It is possible to combine dierent types of independent variables: exogenous,
predetermined and/or endogenous.

    xtabond vardepend var1 var2 var3, lags(#) twostep vce(robust) pre(var4, var5,
lagstructur(#,#)) endog(var6, var7, lagstructur(#,#))
   The limitation of the (lags) can be specied for each variable or groups of
variables.

   xtabond vardepend var1 var2 var3, lags(#) twostep vce(robust) endog(var6,
var7, lagstructur(1,.)) endog(var8, lagstructur(2,2))
   Where, var1, var2 and var3 are the independent exogenous variables and var6,
var7 and var8 are the independent endogenous variables.

   The number maximum of lags will depend on the period of time of the sample,
taking into account that when it is used, the estimator in dierence, one      t is lost
for each dierence.

   In the estimation other commands can be used to specify the limitation of the
instruments:



                                       Revista Colombiana de Estadística 41 (2018) 3152

44                                                     Romilio Labra & Celia Torrecillas

     1. Maxdelp (#) Maximum number of lags of the dependent variables that can
be used as instruments.

     2. Maxlags (#) Maximum number of lags of the predetermined and endogenous
variables.




4.2. xtdpdsys Estimators (Instruments in Dierences and
     Levels)
     The syntax for the using of this command is:

   xtdpdsys vardep var1 var2, lags(#) twostep vce(robust) pre(var4, var5, lagstruc-
tur(#,#)) endog(var6, var7, lagstructur(#,#)).
   Where, var1, var2 and var3 are the exogenous independent variables, var4 and
var5 are the predetermined independent variables, and var6, var7 and var8 are the
endogenous independent variables.

     The description of the syntax for these estimators (xtdpdsys) is similar to
the xtabond (explained in paragraphs above).         The only dierence is the use of
the comand xtdpdsys. At the level of methodology, the main dierence between
both estimators (xtabond and xtdpdsys) is the treatment used for the building of
instrumental variables. The rst one use only instrumental variables in dierences
and the second one use instrumental variables in levels.




4.3. xtabond2 Estimator (Instrumental Variables in
     Dierences and Levels)
     Stata has some estimators that use the instrumental variables in level and
dierences. (   xtdpdsys and xtdpd ). However, the estimator xtabond2 has some
advantages regarding the latter ones. This estimator allows excluding the lags of
the dependent variables as regressors.

     To perform the model using this estimator it is necessary to install the com-
mand in Stata.      For doing that, it must be written as     ndit xtabond2  in the
command bar.

     As it has been mentioned,   xtabond only use as instrumental variables the lags
in dierences. This will reduce the number of instruments used in the regression.
In addition,    xtabond2 uses the lags in levels, increasing the size of the matrix
(system equation) and the number of instruments of the endogenous variable(s).
Therefore, the rst one,   xtabond, is recommendable when the period is long, while
the last one,   xtabond2, is better for a panel with a short period of time, given that
it incorporates the instruments in levels, reducing the loses of information.

     xtabond2 can use instruments in dierences and in levels. This information
is incorporated in the model with the following expressions; instruments in dif-
                gmmstyle ), only dierences (command eq(di )) or only levels
ference and levels (
command eq(level)).
(



                                         Revista Colombiana de Estadística 41 (2018) 3152

Estimating dynamic Panel data. A practical approach to perform long panels            45



   To run the analysis on Stata with     xtabond2, the instructions are divided into
two parts; the rst one identies the variables that we are going to analyze, and
the second one indicates how those variables are going to be incorporated into the
model (endogenous, predetermined or exogenous).          This second part also intro-
duces the restrictions. Both parts of the equation are separated by a comma.

   First, we will introduce the dependent variable with its lags and then, the
independent variables.     If we want to incorporate the dependent variable as a
regressor, this must be specied between the dependent and independent variables
using the syntax of   l.vardep, for the rst lag of the dependent variable, l(#). This
same structure is used for the specication of independent variables through their
lags.

   There are two ways for giving instructions to Stata in the treatment of the
variables.

   a. gmmstyle o gmm: for endogenous and predetermined variables.
   b. ivstyle o iv : for exogenous variables

   xtabond2 doesn't require the postestimation for Sargan and Hansen test (overi-
dentication and for the serial autocorrelation of the error term), because these
tests are reported directly.

   In the following lines we describe the syntax in XTABOND 2 for the use of
exogenous, predetermined and endogenous variables.




4.3.1. Models with Independent Exogenous Variables
   xtabond2 vardep l.vardep var1 var2 var3, gmm (l.vardep, lag (# #)) iv (var1
var2 var3) robust twostep
   Where,

   var1 and var2 are exogenous variables, and l.vardep is the lag of the dependent
variable used as regressor, with its instrument restrictions   -lags (# #). This
regressor l.vardep may be avoided in the estimation- In this case will also be
avoided in the second part of the equation -gmm (l.vardep, lag(# #))-.

   Robust is the instruction for working with heterocedasticity.

4.3.2. Models with Independent Variables as Predetermined
   There are three alternatives for the specication of predetermined variables
that report the same results:

   1. gmm(var 4 var5)
   2. gmm(var 4 var5, lag(. .)

   3. gmm(var4 var5, lag(1 .)

   xtabond2 vardep l.vardep var4 var5, gmm (l.vardep, lag (# #)) gmm (var4
var5) robust twostep

                                        Revista Colombiana de Estadística 41 (2018) 3152

46                                                   Romilio Labra & Celia Torrecillas

     The last syntax has used the rst option. This indicates that var4 and var5
are predetermined variables, and therefore, they are specied with the command
gmm. Moreover, the exogenous variables will use the command iv.



4.3.3. Models with Endogenous Independent Variables
     In the following example, the variables   var6 and var7 are endogenous regres-
sors. Note that the main dierences with the syntax of the predetermined variables
are found in the specication of the lags. As in the description above, there are
three alternatives of specication:

     1. gmm(l.(var6 var7))
     2. gmm(l.(var6 var7, lag(2 .))

     3. gmm(l.(var6 var7, lag(1 .))

     In the following description we use the rst alternative:

   xtabond2 vardep l.vardep var6 var7, gmm (l.vardep, lag (# #)) gmm(l.var6
var7) robust twostep
   The variables (var6 and var7 ) are considered as endogenous using 3 or more lags
(lag(3 .), and the independent variable is also introduced as endogenous regressor:
l.vardep.
     The independent variables can be introduced using one or more lags. This is
expressed in the rst part of the equation. (e.g, if we want to use one lag, it should
                                  l
be expressed with the command ., ex:     l.(var6)). This means that the variable var
will be analyzed using its rst lag.

     The syntax is as follows:

     - Using the rst lag in the independents variable

   xtabond2 vardep l.vardep l.(var6 var7), gmm (l.vardep, lag (# #)) gmm(l.(var6
var7)) robust twostep
     - Using the rst and second lag in the independent variables

   xtabond2 vardep l.vardep l(1/2).(var6 var7), gmm (l.vardep, lag (# #)) gmm(l.(var6
var7)) robust twostep

4.3.4. Combination in the Treatment of the Variables
     In this section, we introduce dierent type of variables.    The instruction for
Stata would be as follow:

     xtabond2 vardep l.vardep var1 var2 var3 var4 var5 l.(var6 var7), ///

   gmm(l.vardep, lag (# #) ///iv(var1 var2 var3) ///
   gmm(var4 var5)///
   gmm(l.(var6 var7)) robust twostep ///
   Where, var1 var2 var3 are exogenous variables, var4 var5 predetermined vari-
ables and var6 var7 endogenous variables, using the rst lag.



                                       Revista Colombiana de Estadística 41 (2018) 3152

Estimating dynamic Panel data. A practical approach to perform long panels                  47



   The following table (Table 2) shows a summary of model estimations alterna-
tives to deal with endogeneity and the corresponding command in Stata.

          Table 2: Alternatives to perform models with endogeneity.
 Model type   Performance step              Comand
 Models      with 1 Model performance to apply Sar- xtabond vardep var1 var2 var3 varn,
 exogenous    in- gan test, with exogenous variables lags(#) twostep estat sargan
 dependent
 variables
                  2    Model     performance    with    xtabond vardep var1 var2 var3, varn,
                  vce(robust) option and, exogenous     lags(#) vce(robust) twostep
                  variables
                  3 Arellano and Bond test            estat abond
 Models      with 1 Model performance to apply Sar-     xtabond vardepend var1 var2 var3,
 predetermined gan test, with predetermined vari-       lags(#)twostep pre (var4, va5,
 independent      ables                                 lagstructur(#,#)) estat sargan
 variables
                  2    Model     performance    with    xtabond vardepend var1 var2 var3,
                  vce(robust)     option     (hetero-   lags(#) twostep vce(robust) pre(var4,
                  cedasticity) and predetermined        var5, lagstructur(#,#))
                  variables
                  3 Arellano and Bond test            estat abond

 Models      with 1 Model performance to apply Sar- xtabond vardepend var1 var2 var3,
 endogenous       gan test, with predetermined en-  lags(#)twostep endog (var6, va7,
 independent      dogenous variables                lagstructur(#,#)) estat sargan
 variables
                  2    Model     performance    with   xtabond vardepend var1 var2
                  vce(robust)     option            var3, lags(#) twostep vce(robust)
                                             (hetero-
                  cedasticity) and predetermined    endog(var6, var7, lagstructur(#,#))
                  endogenous variables
 Endogenous       Models with independent exoge-    xtabond2 vardep l.vardep var1 var2
 models           nous variables                    var3, gmm (l.vardep, lag (# #)) iv
                                                    (var1 var2 var3) robust twostep
                  Models with independent variables xtabond2 vardep l.vardep var4 var5,
                  as predetermined                  gmm (l.vardep, lag (# #)) gmm (var4
                                                    var5) robust twostep
                  Models with endogenous indepen- xtabond2 vardep l.vardep l.(var6
                  dent variables                    var7), gmm (l.vardep, lag (# #))
                                                    gmm(l.(var6 var7)) robust twostep
                  Models with mix of independent xtabond2 vardep l.vardep var1 var2
                  variables                         var3 var4 var5 l.(var6 var7), ///
                                                    gmm(l.vardep, lag (# #) ///iv(var1
                                                    var2 var3) ///gmm(var4 var5)///
                                                    gmm(l.(var6 var7)) robust twostep ///

4.4. Sargan, Hansen and Arellano and Bond Test.
     Interpretation
4.4.1. Sargan Test
   This test veries the validity of the instruments used in the analysis (Roodman,
2008). This test is used for One Step estimations and in samples where there is



                                          Revista Colombiana de Estadística 41 (2018) 3152

48                                                       Romilio Labra & Celia Torrecillas

not a risk of overestimation. However, in Two Step estimations is recommended
the use of the Hansen test (this last one is available for       xtabond2 ) to check the
overidentication.
                                    2                             2
     The statistics reported is x . The number close to the x         in parentheses, corre-
spond to the quantity of instruments over the instruments needed. The dierence
between the total instruments and the instruments leftover, is the optimal number
of instrument for the model.

     The interpretation of the Sargan test will be as follow:

     Null hypothesis
     Ho: All the restrictions of overidentication are valid.

     Criteria of rejection or acceptation:
               2
     Prob>chi      ≥ 0.05(5%)
     If the probability obtained is equal or higher to 0.05, the used instruments in
the estimation are valid, and therefore overidentication doesn't exit. Therefore,
there is no evidence to reject the       null hypothesis. However, if the probability is
lower than 0.05, the data is suggesting that the instruments are not valid and as
consequence there is overidentication in the model. Therefore, we reject the null
hypothesis.

     If the probability is close to 1, this doesn't mean that the instruments are valid.
It means that the asymptotic properties of the test have not been applied. In that
case, we should reject Ho, as in the case where the probability is lower than < 0.05
(Roodman 2009).

     Given that the estimator uses the higher quantity of available instruments and
the probability of overindentication is high, when we reject the Sargan test, it is
recommendable to apply some restrictions to the generation of instruments. For
doing that, we can use the following commands:

     xtabond and xtdpdsys: maxlags or maxldep
     xtabond2: lags, collapse, eq(level) and eq(di).

4.4.2. Hansen Test
     This test is available for     xtabond2 and it is calculated directly when we use
this command. In addition, it is recommendable to use it with the heterocedastic
weight matrix (Two step). The interpretation of the test will be as follow:

     Null hypothesis(Ídem Sargan)
     Ho: All the restrictions of overidentication are valid.

     Criteria of rejection/acceptation
     P rob > x2 ≥ 0.05(5%)
     If the probability is close to 1, it means that the asymptotic properties of the
test have not been applied, and therefore we also must reject Ho (Roodman 2009).
                                2                                           2
     As recommendation P (x ) should be in the range of 0.05 ≤ P (x ) < 0.8, being
                                                2
the optimal to nd a probability 0.1 ≤ (x ) < 0.25



                                           Revista Colombiana de Estadística 41 (2018) 3152

Estimating dynamic Panel data. A practical approach to perform long panels              49


             2
   If P (X       ) is out of that range, the model could be overidentied and might be
needed the introduction of some restrictions in the generation of instruments. For
the application of this test Stata use the following commands:

   Sargan Test: estat sargan
   Using it after the estimation with One step

   Hansen Test: it is given directly when xtabond2 is used.

4.4.3. Arellano and Bond Autocorrelation Test
   Dynamic panel data introduces the condition of no correlation in the errors
term (Cameron & Trivedi 2009). For testing that, we use the Arellano and Bond
test.

   We should expect that the probability of Ar(2) (pr > z) will be not signi-
cant at 5%. This will conrm the absence of serial autocorrelation in the errors.
Normally, Ar(1) should be signicant at 5% (AR (1) pr > z < 0.05).

   The interpretation of this test will be as follow:

   Null hypothesis:
   Ho: Autocorrelation doesn't exit.

   Criteria of rejection/acceptation
   To reject that null hypothesis we will use AR (2). This rejection applies when
the probability pr > z is higher than 0.05, that is to say, the errors term are not
serially correlated.




5. Conclusions

   Panel data methodology has become one of the most popular tools used by
researchers and academics who try to explain economics phenomenon by empirical
analysis. Panel data allows incorporating into the analysis the eect of individuals
and time, which gives a great advantage over cross sectional or time series.

   Findings and new contributions have enabled to perform dynamic models, be-
ing able to analyze endogenous processes as evolutionary theory proposes. Most of
the works in this regard have been conducted using databases made up of a large
number of individuals and a short period of time (typical of micro data), however
when estimating panels with few individuals and extended periods of time some
limitations arise.

   The main restriction in these cases arises from the overidentication of the
model due to the proliferation of instruments of endogenous regressors when we use
the GMM alternative including equations in levels and dierences. This situation
requires adjustments (options) and to apply several considerations to properly
estimate models with this type of databases and methodology.

   Although there are important advances in the study and works on panel data,
dynamic version still requires additional eorts. Therefore, this article addresses



                                          Revista Colombiana de Estadística 41 (2018) 3152

50                                                     Romilio Labra & Celia Torrecillas

this restriction in order to guide researcher to implement dynamic panel data
using Stata software. In particular, this paper provides guidance for the scholars
to understand the origin of the overidentication, as well as provide some tools to
solve it.

     Among the main strategies to conduct the overidentication described in this
article are: restricting the lags of the dependent variable used as regressor of the
model; limit the use of lags to generate instruments of endogenous independent
variables; and avoid using equations in levels and dierences simultaneously. In
addition, researchers should pay attention to the serial autocorrelation tendency
in this type of models. Thus, both challenges must be simultaneously addressed.

     All the above must be permanently checked through the statistical tests in or-
der to verify that conditions and restrictions of the estimation are found. There-
fore, the incorporation of explanatory variables should be step by step, avoiding
overidentication and allowing a better t of the model.

     This article is not free of weaknesses, since the objective is to provide a practical
methodological support for non-specialist researchers in econometrics. The focus
of this work is not the building of a theory, the search of a new estimator or specic
test for this type of panel data, but this paper only tries to provide a guide to
estimate dynamic models using Panel. In this sense, this work oers a way to carry
out quantitative studies on several phenomena from data collected in a long time
series and small number of individuals, which is common in database of countries,
regions or where the observed unit has a limited population.

                
                 Received: January 2017  Accepted: September 2017
References
Anderson T W, Hsiao C. Estimation of dynamic models with error components.(1981).Journal of the American statistical Association.
Arellano M, Bond S. Some tests of specication for panel data: Monte Carlo evidence and an application to employment equations.(1991). The Review of Economic Studies.
Arellano M, Bover O. Another look at the instrumental variable estimation of error-components models.(1995). Journal of Econometrics.
Balestra P, Nerlove M. Pooling cross section and time series data in the estimation of a dynamic model: The demand for natural gas.(1966). Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society.
Barro R. Economic growth in a cross section of countries.(1991). Quarterly Journal of Economics.
Blundell R, Bond S. Initial conditions and moment restrictions in dynamic panel data models.(1998). Journal of Econometrics.
Cameron A, Trivedi P. Microeconometrics using Stata.(2009). Stata Press College Station.
Chudik A, Pesaran M H, Tosetti E. Weak and strong cross-section dependence and estimation of large panels.(2011). Structural Change and Economic Dynamics.
Dosi G. Sources procedures and microeconomic efects of innovation.(1988). Journal of economic literature XXVI.
Hoechile D. Analysis of a complex of statistical variables into principal components.(1933). Journal of Educational Psychology.
Labra R, Torrecillas C. Guía cero para datos de panel, un enfoque práctico.(2014). Universidad Autónoma de Madrid.
Lee K, Pesaran M, Pierse R. Testing for aggregation bias in linear models.(1990). Economic Journal (100).
Álvarez I, Labra R. Technology Gap and Catching up in Economies Based on Natural Resources: The Case of Chile.(2014). Journal of Economics Business and Management.
Maddala G. The likelihood approach to pooling cross section and time series data.(1971). Econometrica.
Maddala G. Some problems arising in pooling cross-section and time-series data.(1975). University of Rochester.
Mairesse J, Griliches Z. Heterogeneity in panel data: are there stable production functions?'.(1988)..
Mileva E. Using Arellano-Bond Dynamic Panel GMM Estimators in Stata.(2007). Fordham University, New York.
Nelson R, Winter S. An evolutionary theory of economic change.(1982). Harvard University Press.
Nerlove M. Further Evidence on the Estimation of Dynamic Economic Relations from a Time Series of Cross Sections.(1971). Econometrica Econometric Society 39.
Pesaran M H. Estimation and inference in large heterogeneous panels with a multifactor error structure.(2006). Econometrica.
Pesaran M H, Pierse R G, Kumar M S. Econometric analysis of aggregation in the context of linear prediction models.(1989). Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society.
Pesaran M H, Smith R. Estimating long-run relationships from dynamic heterogeneous panels.(1995). Journal of econometrics.
Phillips P C B, Sul, D. Dynamic Panel Estimation and Homogeneity Testing under Cross Section Dependence.(2003).  The Econometrics Journal.
Pérez-López C. Econometría Avanzada: Técnicas y Herramientas.(2008). Pearson Prentice Hall.
Roodman D. How to do xtabond2: An introduction to dierence and system GMM in Stata.(2006)..
Roodman D. A note on the theme of too many instruments.(2009). Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics.
Ruíz Porras A. Econometric research with panel data: History - models and uses in mexico MPRA-paper 42909.(2012). University Library of Munich.
Santos Arteaga F J, Torrecillas C, Tavana M. Dynamic efects of learning on the innovative outputs and productivity in spanish multinational enterprises.(2017). The Journal of Technology Transfer.
Sargan J D. The estimation of economic relationships using instrumental variables.(1958). Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society.
Torrecillas C, Fischer B B, Sánchez A. The dual role of R&D expenditures in European Union's member states: short-and long-term prospects.(2017). Innovation: The European Journal of Social Science Research.
Wooldridge J. Introductory Econometrics: A Modern Approach, 5 edn.(2013). South-Western.
