A Multivariate Analysis Approach to Forecasts Combination, Application to Foreign Exchange (FX) Markets. Una aproximación a la combinación de pronósticos basada en técnicas de análisis multivariante
Universidad Pontificia Comillas, Madrid, España
Abstract
Forecasting is characterized by the availability of a lot of methods and the fact that technological and economic forecast horizons are increasingly more different from each other. Combining forecasts is an adequate methodology for handling the above scenario, which is conceptually suitable for the application of several methods of multivariate analysis. This paper reviews some main problems in combining forecasts efficiently from the multivariate analysis view. In particular, a methodology to produce combined forecasts with a large number of forecasts is proposed. The usefulness of such a methodology is assessed in exchange rates forecasting. Further research is suggested for finance as well as for other practical contexts such as energy markets.
Key words: Combining forecasting, Factor analysis, Forecasting methodology, Principal components analysis, Time series.
Resumen
El cálculo de pronósticos se caracteriza por la disponibilidad de muchos métodos y porque los horizontes de los pronósticos o las predicciones (económicas, tecnológicas, etc.) son cada vez más diferentes. Combinar pronósticos es una metodología adecuada para manejar el escenario anterior, el cual es conceptualmente adecuado para la aplicación de varios métodos de análisis multivariante. Este artículo revisa algunos problemas principales al combinar pronósticos de manera eficiente, empleando el marco del análisis multivariante. En concreto, se propone una metodología para generar pronósticos combinados con un gran número de pronósticos y se analiza una aplicación al mercado de divisas. Se valora la utilidad de esta metodología en finanzas y varios contextos prácticos, abriéndose posibilidades futuras de investigación a otros contextos aplicados, como los mercados de energía.
Palabras clave: análisis de componentes principales, análisis factorial, combinar pronósticos, metodología para pronósticos, series temporales.

1. Introduction
   The 21st century is providing diversity and multiple options for every problem
and situation in the real world. Obvious examples are the fast transference in
know-how from the academic to the non-academic world, improved knowledge in
the scientific community, easy and flexible software, or increased availability due
to new technologies (see, as an example of the above facts, the film The Social
Network ).
   Forecasting is now characterised by the availability of a large number of meth-
ods, an updated review of which is available from several sources: Armstrong
(2001), Diebold (2001), Elliott, Granger   Timmerman (2006), Makridakis, Wheel-
wright   Hyndman (1998).
    Furthermore, forecast horizons for companies and institutions are increasingly
different and yet interrelated. Decision-makers now require related predictions for
the immediate and short run, or for the medium or long run, or even for the three
standard horizons: short, medium and long ones. For example, Sánchez-Ubeda &
Berzosa (2007) provide an application to forecasting industrial end-use natural gas
consumption in Spain, where the company Enagás requires forecasts in a medium-
term horizon (1–3 years) with a very high resolution (days). Other works covering
this problem are Kang (2003), Andrawis, Atiya   El-Shishiny (2011) and references
cited there.
    Combining forecasts is generally regarded as an appropriate methodology for
handling the above scenario, having reached maturity and recognition over the
last forty years (Bates   Granger 1969, Bunn 1989, Clemen 1989, de Menezes,
Bunn   Taylor 2000, Armstrong 2001, Timmerman 2006). In economics, a recent
application is devoted to forecasting US employment growth (Rapach   Strauss
2008). On the other hand, Kapetanios, Labhard   Price (2008) report about that
forecasts combination generally leads to a reduction in forecast error.
    Such a setting is conceptually suitable for the application of multivariate anal-
ysis methods (MAM in the following). In the last fifteen years, these techniques
have benefited from big improvements with regard to easiness of use, the over-
coming of limitations and the recognition of enlarged usefulness (Hair, Anderson,
Tatham   Black 1998). Hence, an adaptation of MAM to new technologies such
as databases, Internet and others is an emerging area.
    Given this scenario, this article proposes the employment of several methods
of classical multivariate analysis to obtain combined forecasts. A recent paper
(Poncela, Rodríguez, Sánchez-Mangas   Senra 2011) proposes the use of dimension
reduction techniques in forecasts combination. However, our approach is different
because it considers several forecast horizons, analyzes the possibilities in forecasts
combination of the key set of multivariate methods and suggests different fields of
applications such as financial markets and energy markets.
    The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the foreign exchange mar-
ket and how forecasting is key in this market. Section 3 is devoted to the analysis
of one forecast combination framework and highlights the multivariate analysis
methods approach. Section 4 reviews one of the problems in combining forecasts

                                     Revista Colombiana de Estadística 34 (2011) 347–375

Multivariate Analysis in Forecasts Combination                                      349

efficiently and proposes a solution to this problem using principal component anal-
ysis. In addition, one application for EURUSD forecasting is presented. Section 5
outlines a new methodology for producing combined forecasts. In Section 6, the
usefulness of such a methodology is considered when its practical implications in
several contexts are analyzed. Finally, some conclusions from this research are
provided.



2. Forecasting in the Foreign Exchange Market
    According to Wikipedia, the foreign exchange market (forex, FX, or cur-
rency market) is a worldwide decentralized over-the-counter financial market for
the trading of currencies. Financial centers around the world function as anchors
of trading between a wide range of different types of around-the-clock buyers and
sellers, with the exception of weekends. The foreign exchange market determines
the relative values of different currencies. The primary purpose of foreign exchange
is to assist international trade and investment, by allowing businesses to convert
one currency to another currency. For example, it permits a US business to import
British goods and pay Pound Sterling, even though its income is in US dollars. It
also enables investors to invest in foreign exchange, and facilitates the carry trade,
in which investors borrow low-yielding currencies and lend (invest in) high-yielding
currencies, and which (it has been claimed) may lead to loss of competitiveness in
some countries.
    The foreign exchange market is highly competitive. In the second semester of
2010 media around the world devoted a lot of news to a possible new currency
war. But this is not a new problem. For example, Posen (2004) analyzed the issue
of avoiding a currency war.
   With respect to the size and importance of the foreign exchange market, Eun
& Sabherwal (2002) stated the following: “The market for foreign exchange is
the largest financial market in the world. According to the Bank for International
Settlements (2001) the average worldwide daily trading in trading foreign exchange
markets is estimated to be US$1.2 trillion”. More recently, King   Rime (2010)
have analyzed the so called “$4 trillion question” giving explanations to the FX
growth since 2007.
    Subsequent to Eun   Sabherwal (2002), and in response to the increasing
importance of this market, there have been a number of studies on forecasting
exchange rates. The substance of many of these studies is the evaluation of the
forecasting performance of one or more exchange rate models. These evaluations
suggest that the best predictor of future spot rate is the current spot rate, i.e., the
random-walk or “no-change” model, the most commonly used benchmark. This
conclusion has also been obtained by Kilian   Taylor (2003).
    There are a lot of websites producing forecasts for different time horizons. Some
of them include forecasts for 3 (3M), 6 month (6M) and 12 (12M) month periods.
For example, http://www-2.danskebank.com/danskemarketsresearch

                                     Revista Colombiana de Estadística 34 (2011) 347–375

350                                                                           Carlos G. Maté

   Some of these sites include forecasts for a week, a month and a quarter. For
example, the following website includes these forecasts by 16 experts.
   http://www.fxstreet.com/technical/forex-forecasts/experts-
forecast-currencies-poll/2010/12/17/03/
   Table 1 shows an example of the information given in the above website.

       Table 1: Elaborated from the information given in www.fxstreet.com
 EUR/USD       1 week        1 month    1 quarter         1 week         1 month   1 quarter
                             Levels                                      Trend
 Expert 1      1.36          1.38       1.32              Bullish        Bullish   Bearish
 Expert 2      1.315         1.291      1.274             Bullish        Bullish   Bearish
 ...           ...           ...        ...               Sideways       Bullish   Sideways
 ...           ...           ...        ...               ...            ...       ...
 Expert 16     1.32          1.30       1.26              Very Bullish   Bearish   Bearish


    King   Rime (2010) explain why electronic trading, based on electronic execu-
tion methods, is transforming FX markets. In particular, high-frequency trading
(HFT) is one algorithmic trading strategy that profits from incremental price
movements with frequent, small trades executed in milliseconds for investment
horizons of typically less than one day. They state that HFT emerged with the
advent of the 21st century, becoming an important source of FX growth from 2004.
   As we can see generating accurate forecasts for the next 24 hours, or the next
60 minutes or the next 60 seconds, is a real challenge in FX markets.


3. A Multivariate Methods Approach for
   Combining Forecasts
   In what follows, it will be assumed that we are interested in forecasting a
magnitude, denoted by Y , for a large number of forecast horizons, denoted by
n, from the information about it in different periods of time 1, 2, . . . until the
present moment (denoted by t). With this objective in mind, the forecaster has
several forecasts obtained using a number of forecasting methods, denoted by
p. In the case of the application provided in Sánchez-Ubeda   Berzosa (2007),
currently used by Enagás, Y is the daily demand for industrial end-use natural
gas consumption and n is 365 × 3 = 1095.

               Table 2: Structure of the information in the problem.
                              M1        M2          ...      ...   Mp
                       H1     f11 (t)   f12 (t)     ...      ...   f1p (t)
                       H2     f21 (t)   f22 (t)     ...      ...   f2p (t)
                       ...    ...       ...         ...      ...   ...
                       ...    ...       ...         ...      ...   ...
                       Hn     fn1 (t)   fn2 (t)     ...      ...   fnp (t)


                                        Revista Colombiana de Estadística 34 (2011) 347–375

Multivariate Analysis in Forecasts Combination                                       351

   Hence, we will assume that we have p unbiased forecasts of the magnitude
Y obtained by p forecasting methods (or experts or a combination of methods
and experts) (M 1, M 2, . . . , M p) for n forecast horizons (H1, H2, . . . , Hn). The
notation fij (t) stands for the forecast obtained in the ith forecast horizon by the
jth method or expert with i = 1, . . . , n and j = 1, . . . , p. All this information can
be shown in a matrix structure (Table 2), denoted by F (t). Table 1 is a particular
case of Table 2 transposing rows and columns.
   In the above setting, the application of classical multivariate analysis meth-
ods (see, for example, Johnson   Wichern 2002, Rencher 2002, and Hair et al.
1998), where the variables are the forecast methods and the units are the forecast
horizons, is appropriate.
    From this information, MAM have been developed for the study of different
problems in data analysis. In our case, the forecasts are obtained using several
methods in different forecast horizons. One of the problems studied is the reduction
of the dimensions of the problem (forecasting methods), the goal of this reduction
being to facilitate the assimilation process of the relationships discovered by the
analyst.
   Another problem is the process of searching for dependence relationships which
would facilitate the understanding of the behavior of some forecasting methods by
taking into account the values that other methods show. Finally, an interesting
problem is the analysis of possible interdependence relationships, which will permit
the detection of subtle relationships between the forecast horizons.
   An initial classification of MAM applied to the structure of Tables 1 and 2,
which can be seen as a particular case of the general structure for MAM, is sum-
marized in Table 3, which collects the proposed use of MAM in forecasting. It
concerns the forecasting of horizons, forecast methods, and the tasks of analyzing
dependence and interdependence between methods, or the problem of reducing
the number of methods, or that of involving the grouping or classifying of forecast
horizons.
    In the following, the potential of MAM in the five problems in Table 3 will be
briefly considered.
    Problem 1. In our forecasting scenario the clearest task would be the re-
duction of the p unbiased forecasts to a smaller number of forecasts (ideally one
or two) for every forecast horizon considered. With this goal in mind, methods
such as Principal Component Analysis (PCA) or Factor Analysis (FA), linear or
non-linear, or even Cluster Analysis applied to forecast methods, could deserve
our attention. In a general context, the clustering approach in prediction has a
long tradition (see, for example, Kusiak   Li 2010 for a recent application in wind
power forecasting).
    Problem 2. Granger   Ramanathan (1984) suggest that conventional forecast
combining methods could be considered within the regression framework. Hence,
the alternative methods for handling this problem in Table 2 must be explored.
For example, MANOVA could be used to analyze if there are significant differences
between a group of forecasts obtained using the same methodology (ARIMA, Neu-
ral Nets, Expert Opinions, . . . ) in different groups of time horizons such as short,

                                      Revista Colombiana de Estadística 34 (2011) 347–375

352                                                                           Carlos G. Maté

medium or long ones. Depending on the conclusion reached, the decision of the
forecaster as to the best way to combine would be different.
    CCA could be used to determine the kind of relationship (linear or non-linear)
between groups of forecasts to decide on the possibility of reducing the number of
forecasts to be considered in the problem.
    Problem 3. Depending on the different forecasting methods used, the use-
fulness of knowing the profile of the forecast horizons with respect to accuracy is
beyond doubt. As many authors have said, there are no methods or methodolo-
gies that outperform the rest for every problem or every time horizon. It seems
that DA and LR can help in future research into these questions. In particular,
approaches in FOREX pose new challenges in International Finance.
    Problem 4. Identifying groups of similar forecast horizons with respect to a
series of forecasting methods or methodologies would make the creation of different
types of combination for every cluster of forecast horizons possible.
    Problem 5. This is one of the most complex problems in MAM and the
same occurs in Table 3. Here, Partial Least Squares could help in solving the
problem, commented on in the above paragraph, of deciding which methods should
be included in clustering forecast horizons.


4. A Solution from Multivariate Analysis Methods
   to the Problem of Efficient Combined Forecasts
   According to several authors Bunn (1988), Clemen   Winkler (1986), Winkler
& Makridakis (1983), in addition to the notation introduced in Section 2, if we
have p unbiased forecasts of the same variable Y for the same time horizon (let this
be i), denoted by fi1 (t) , . . . , fip (t), then the composite forecast, denoted by ci (t),
based upon the p × 1 vector of the linear weights, wi (t), will adopt the expression
                                    ci (t) = wi′ (t) fi (t)                               (1)
and will be optimum in the sense of having a minimum forecast error variance if
wi (t) is determined according to
                                              S−1
                                                i (t) ei (t)
                                wi (t) =                                                  (2)
                                           ei (t) S−1
                                            ′
                                                   i (t) ei (t)
                            ′
where ei (t) = (1, 1, . . . , 1) is an p × 1 unit vector and Si (t) is an p × p covariance
matrix of forecast errors between the p forecasts for the ith forecast horizon.
    According to a previous study (Clemen   Winkler 1986), if a normal or Gaus-
sian is assumed for the forecasting errors, then the combined forecast ci (t) is a
weighted average of the individual forecasts fi1 (t) , . . . , fip (t) with the vector of
weights
                                              P     −1
                                       e′i (t) ci (t)
                         wi′ (t) =         P      −1                                (3)
                                   e′i (t) c i (t)     ei (t)


                                           Revista Colombiana de Estadística 34 (2011) 347–375

Multivariate Analysis in Forecasts Combination                                             353

         Table 3: Brief summary of the proposed use of MAM in forecasting.
        Problem                     MAM                            Comments
  1. To reduce the          - Factor Analysis (FA)    Factors usually are determined by
  original information to   - Principal Component     principal component analysis or by a
  a smaller set of new      Analysis (PCA)            common factor analysis.
  forecasting methods
  (factors)

  2. To determine the       - Regression              The differences between methods are
  existence of              - Analysis of variance    due to the number and kind of
  dependence                (ANOVA)                   forecasting methods that are included
  relationships between     - Canonical               in every group of forecasting methods.
  two groups of             Correlation Analysis
  forecasting methods       (CCA)
                            - Conjoint Analysis
                            (CoA)

  3. To assign forecast     - Discriminant            The first method is more general than
  horizons to groups        Analysis (DA)             the second one, however the latter
  characterized by a        - Logistic Regression     raises more flexible hypotheses.
  series of forecasting     (LR)
  methods
  4. To make or to          - Cluster Analysis        The first method provides groups of
  identify groups of        (ClA)                     forecast horizons with maximum
  forecast horizons         - Multidimensional        internal homogeneity and maximum
  similar between them      Scaling (MS)              heterogeneity between them. The
                            - Correspondence          second one facilitates the discovery of
                            Analysis (CA)             the number of dimensions where the
                            - CHAID Analysis          forecasts horizons (units) are similar.
                                                      While, the third one allows
                                                      accommodating different type of data
                                                      and non-linear relationships. The last
                                                      one proposes groups according to a
                                                      dependent variable or forecasting
                                                      method, making easy the
                                                      classification of new forecast horizons
                                                      in the corresponding groups.

  5. Searching for          - Structural Equation     SEM makes it possible to analyse
  crossed relationships     Modelling (SEM)           several relationships at the same time.
  of multiple               - Partial Least Squares   It is an extension of several MAM like
  dependence and the        (PLS)                     FA or Regression. PLS facilitates the
  representation of                                   discovery of the number of dimensions
  non-observed concepts                               where the forecast horizons are
  in such relationships                               similar.


              P                            P
depending on c i (t). Thus, the estimate c i (t) which can be determined from
past data on estimation errors, prior information or some combination thereof
plays an important role in the determination of the combined forecast.


4.1. Combined Forecasts with Principal Component Analysis
   Principal Component Analysis (PCA), initially introduced by Pearson in 1901
and independently by Hotelling in 1933, is one of the oldest MAM. This tech-

                                         Revista Colombiana de Estadística 34 (2011) 347–375

354                                                                          Carlos G. Maté

nique, applied to our problem, will involve describing or explaining the structure
of variation in a multivariate data set (with evidence of interdependence between
the variables, see Table 2 in Section 3) in terms of a set of uncorrelated variables
where every one is a specific linear combination of the original forecasting meth-
ods. That is, a linear combination of forecasts can be obtained as an alternative
to usual ways of proceeding.
    In the following, we denote by f (t) the vector of the p forecast methods with
the available information until t, in such a way that if the jth method or column
of Figure 1 is designed by fj (t), it follows that

                            f (t) = (f1 (t) , f2 (t) , . . . , fp (t))

    Furthermore, the population covariance matrix associated with the F (t) matrix
in Table 2 will be denoted by S (t).
   In this situation, the first component extracted will be a linear combination of
the p forecast methods, designed by C1(t), such that

                                       C1(t) = a′1 · f (t)                               (4)

whose sample variance is the biggest for all vector of coefficients a1 . Consequently,
the sample variance can be increased without limit and a restriction to these
coefficients must be considered. That the sum of squares will be one, i.e.,

                                          a′1 · a1 = 1                                   (5)

   Similarly, the second component denoted by C2(t) will be

                                       C2(t) = a′2 · f (t)

    with maximum variance restricted to the two conditions a′2 · a2 = 1 and
a2 · a1 = 0.
    Extending the above reasoning to the ith component, it will be verified that it
is a linear combination of the p original variables, denoted by Cj(t), such that

                                       Cj(t) = a′j · f (t)                               (6)

   with maximum variance restricted to the following conditions

                        a′j · aj = 1     and a′j · ai = 0        (i < j)                 (7)

    Thus, the problem of finding the principal components (PC) in a matrix like
that of Table 2 consists in obtaining the vectors of coefficients aj , for j = 1, 2, . . .;
with a limit in p. We can show (Johnson   Wichern 2002) that this problem
is equivalent to that of obtaining the eigenvectors of the correlation matrix be-
tween the forecast methods. The associated eigenvalues will be λ1 > · · · > λp
and the total variance of the p PC will be equal to the variance of the original

                                          Revista Colombiana de Estadística 34 (2011) 347–375

Multivariate Analysis in Forecasts Combination                                     355

forecasts. Moreover, the trace (sum of the diagonal elements) of the covariance
matrix, tr(S(t)), will verify
                                Xp
                                   λi = tr(S(t))                            (8)
                                  i=1

   Hence, the jth PC accounts for a proportion of variance

                                           λi
                                                                                   (9)
                                        tr(S(t))

of the total variance in the original forecast methods.
    The usefulness of PCA lies in that the components, the different combination of
the forecast methods in our setting, employ the variance in a decreasing proportion.
Thus, the important issue for obtaining an appropriate reduction of the forecasts
consists of answering the following question: How many components should be
extracted?
   There are a series of formal techniques (see, for example, Basilevsky 2004),
but we will restrict ourselves to informal rules used in practical contexts Gorsuch
(1983). They are the following.

  1. The inclusion of a sufficient number of components to explain some large
     relative percentage of the total variance. The quotes between 70 and 90
     percent are usually suggested. However, lower values arise when p or n
     increase.

  2. The exclusion of those components whose eigenvalues are less than the
     average.

  3. Plotting the eigenvalues λi (in decreasing order) versus the index i, called
     scree plot, to select the number of components needed to extract the value
     of i corresponding to an elbow in the curve. That is, the point where big
     eigenvalues soften and small eigenvalues begin.

   The above development is based on terms of eigenvectors and eigenvalues of the
covariance matrix S(t). However, these components are usually extracted from the
correlation matrix (that associated to F (t) in our setting), which will be denoted
by R (t).
   The reasons for the last statement are not difficult to understand if we imagine
a multivariate data set where the variables represent very different approaches to
the problem. In such a case, the structure of the PC obtained from the covariance
matrix will depend on the choice, essentially arbitrary, of the units of measurement.
Moreover, if there are great differences between the variances of the forecasting
methods, those whose variances are biggest will tend to dominate the first CP.
   Extracting PC by the eigenvalues of R (t) will exclude the above difficulty.
This procedure is equivalent to calculating the PC of the original methods after
standardizing for having unit variance.

                                    Revista Colombiana de Estadística 34 (2011) 347–375

356                                                                   Carlos G. Maté

   However, in the rest of the situations, the PC must be extracted from the
covariance matrix, because this is closer to the spirit and substance of the PCA,
especially if the components will be employed in further computations, which is
very common when forecasting with several forecasts.
    With respect to the PC extracted from R (t) and S (t), the following can be
stated.

  1. Eigenvectors, eigenvalues and coefficients from the PC extracted from S(t)
     will differ from the PC extracted from R (t).

  2. The percentage of variance that components of R (t) account for will differ
     from the percentage that account for the extracted components from S (t).

  3. The extracted components from a matrix R (t) are not unique or exclusive
     to that matrix.

    Finally, several measuring to indicate the adequacy of the data matrix F (t)
to PCA have been developed. One of the most simple is the Kaiser-Meyer-Olkin
or KMO test. According to Hair et al. (1998), this test assesses the adequacy of
using PCA on data. Values greater than 0.7 suggest that it is appropriate to apply
PCA to the considered matrix. Moreover, measures to elucidate the question of
whether a forecasting method must be included in the problem of the reduction
of the information are available. The most commonly used is MSA (measure
of sample adequacy) and recommendations about this amount have been given
Rencher (2002).


4.2. One Basic Application to FX markets
    Several cases have been run to evaluate the above approach. To show a par-
ticular case, the daily EURUSD close rate from January 1999 to December 2010
has been considered. This series will be denoted by Y (t). To analyze this series,
the series of differences should be obtained. That is, ∆Y (t) = Y (t) − Y (t − 1).
   Plots of these series are shown in Figures 1 and 2.
  A simple and visual analysis of Figures 1 and 2 allows us to conclude that the
EURUSD series has the following features:

  1. Soft linear trend, with several long periods of decreasing trend and other
     periods of increasing trend. In consequence, several turning points can be
     detected.

  2. Due to sharp decreasing or increasing, presence or absence of structural
     breaks should be considered.

  3. The differentiated series is not a white noise. Therefore, the EURUSD series
     is not a random walk.

                                   Revista Colombiana de Estadística 34 (2011) 347–375

Multivariate Analysis in Forecasts Combination                                                      357


               1.8




               1.6




               1.4




               1.2




                 1




               0.8




               0.6
              1−1−1999      1−12−2000   1−11−2002   1−10−2004   1−09−2006   1−08−2008   2−07−2010




                                    Figure 1: Plot of daily EURUSD.




              0.06




              0.04




              0.02




                0




             −0.02




             −0.04




             −0.06
              1−1−1999      1−12−2000   1−11−2002   1−10−2004   1−09−2006   1−08−2008   2−07−2010




                         Figure 2: Plot of the series EURUSD differenced.




    These facts lead to conclude that the EURUSD series is predictable, but not
for all years (e.g., the first half of 2007 in the differenced series is close to a white
noise). In addition, several methods should be considered and information from
the past which is not longer valid could be removed.

   Figure 3 shows the boxplots of both datasets, Y (t) and ∆Y (t).

                                                    Revista Colombiana de Estadística 34 (2011) 347–375

358                                                                     Carlos G. Maté




              Figure 3: Boxplots of series 1 and series 1 differentiated.



   In the reminder of this article, the results will be shown using the STAT-
GRAPHICS CENTURION software. There are, however, a variety of software
packages and we do not wish to give the impression that we endorse one over any
other.
    The forecasting methods employed are very basic, but usual in FOREX, to give
more relevance to the application proposed itself instead of using sophisticated or
complicated methods. They came from the exponential smoothing approach, poly-
nomial trend and the ARIMA methodology, using the Forecast method procedure
in STATGRAPHICS in an automatic or a manual way. Forecasts were obtained
using six methods, see Table 4 for details, and a matrix like that in Table 2 was
available. ARIMA models are usually considered in FOREX markets (see, e.g.,
Dunis   Williams 2005).

            Table 4: Accuracy measures with the six methods employed.
          Model               #     RMSE            MAE         MAPE         AIC
  Random walk                 0    0.00767929      0.0056745    0.479297    −9.73846
  ARIMA (3,0,2) with const.   1    0.00765786      0.0056721    0.478967    −9.74405
  ARIMA (1,0,0)               2    0.00767834     0.00567289      0.47914     −9.7387
  Holt, alpha = 0.9966 and    3    0.00769148    0.00566384    0.478415        −9.734
  beta = 0.0075
  ARIMA (6,0.5) with const.   4   0.00765561      0.00567007    0.478764    −9.74463
  ARIMA (4,1,6)               5      0.007668     0.00567807    0.479561      −9.7414
  Quadratic trend             6      0.104693      0.0849887      7.52837   −4.51345
  −6.29 + 0.00058 t
  −1.0399E-8 t2


    As a result of extracting the first PC of the five first methods considered,
and using the covariance matrix associated to the forecasting matrix, Figure 4 is
obtained. Using only a PC, we will retain practically all the information in the
five forecasting methods considered.
   The main conclusion obtained from Table 5 is that combining by means of the
proposed approach in this paper is the same as combining by means of the simple

                                     Revista Colombiana de Estadística 34 (2011) 347–375

Multivariate Analysis in Forecasts Combination                                      359

average. That is, the following important property can be stated: combining with
the simple average theoretically will produce the maximum variance between linear
combinations of the considered forecasting methods. Timmerman (2006) concludes
that the equal weights average is a benchmark that has proved surprisingly difficult
to beat. An interesting research issue is to connect both results from a theoretical
point of view.




      Figure 4: Scree plot for 5 forecasting methods with the EURUSD series.



Table 5: Matrix of weights for the combination of the five forecasting methods with the
         EURUSD series.
                                                 Component
                                                     1
                         FORECASTS_M1              0.447214
                         FORECASTS_M2              0.447214
                         FORECASTS_M3              0.447213
                         FORECASTS_M4              0.447214
                         FORECASTS_M5              0.447214

    Another use of PCA is in the detection of forecasting methods with null or
low influence on the structure of variability in the forecasting matrix, where PCA
will permit us to discard those methods in the combination. For example, Table
6 shows that situation with the sixth method used to obtain the PC.


5. A New Methodology to Produce Combined
   Forecasts for Several Forecast Horizons
   As has been mentioned in the introduction to this paper, forecasters of the
21st century will have at their disposal a large number of forecasts that they may
want to combine. See, for example, the ‘suite of statistical forecasting models’ (the
‘Suite’) of The Bank of England in Kapetanios et al. (2008).

                                     Revista Colombiana de Estadística 34 (2011) 347–375

360                                                                     Carlos G. Maté


Table 6: Matrix of weights for the combination of the six forecasting methods with the
         EURUSD series.
                                                Component
                                                    1
                         FORECASTS_M1             0.415608
                         FORECASTS_M2             0.415609
                         FORECASTS_M3               0.4156
                         FORECASTS_M4             0.415608
                         FORECASTS_M5             0.415608
                         FORECASTS_M6             0.369264


    In 1989, Granger reviewed some alternatives to original methods of forecasting,
stating that the latter were too complicated for using with a large number of
forecasts available for combination.
    In this section, a methodology for the production of combined forecasts is
proposed, for a context in which a set of forecasting methods are available for
several forecast horizons. In the sequel, it will be assumed that we are interested
in forecasting a magnitude Y for a large number of forecast horizons, denoted by
n, using the information available up to the present moment (designed by t ). With
this objective in mind, the forecaster has obtained several forecasts using a number
of forecasting methods, denoted by p. All this information is shown in the matrix
structure of Table 2, introduced in Section 3.
   In some MAM it is customary to consider that p << n, but situations where
p >> n are frequent and important analyses can be conducted. In forecasting,
every situation for all possible values of p and n must be considered.
   Case p ≥ n (there are at least as many forecasting methods as forecast
horizons)
    In this situation, experience in the use of MAM indicates that it would be
appropriate to use procedures for the reduction of the dimension of the problem
as PCA or FA do. One possibility would be to cluster the forecasting methods
and then to explore a way of constructing combined forecasts from the centroids
of the clusters.
   Case p < n (there are fewer forecasting methods than forecast horizons)
    Here, we will assume that the ratio is less than five to one (no more than five
forecast horizons for every forecasting method). Hence, the use of techniques for
reducing the dimension of the problem as PCA or FA would not be appropriate.
However, these techniques could be used in the way that is analysed in the following
case.
   Case p << n (there are far more forecast horizons than forecasting methods)
   In this situation, the practice of MAM suggests the use of techniques (such as
PCA or FA) for reducing the dimension of the problem. The literature on these
methods is much too vast to adequately cite here; but there are excellent general

                                     Revista Colombiana de Estadística 34 (2011) 347–375

Multivariate Analysis in Forecasts Combination                                         361

developments (Johnson   Wichern 2002, Rencher 2002, Hair et al. 1998) and a
thorough coverage of these techniques (Gorsuch 1983, Basilevsky 2004).
    In our context, factor analysis would be concerned with the identification of
an underlying structure within a set of forecasting methods. Hence, we will try
to simplify the complicated interrelations among a large number of forecasting
methods, in a search of certain unobservable common factors which are not related
to each other. In consequence, the goal of this technique is the reduction of
forecasting methods and the ascertaining of the relevant characteristics of the
original set of methods by the construction of a smaller number of new common
factors or latent variables with a minimum loss of information.
   The adaptation of the general model of factor analysis (Johnson   Wichern
2002, Jobson 1992, Basilevsky 2004) to the forecasting context developed in Section
3 will involve handling three sets of variables: a set of p forecasting methods
F M1 , . . . , F Mp with mean vector µ and covariance matrix Σ; a set of m unobserved
variables or combined forecasts called common factors C1 , . . . , Cm where m ≤ p;
and a set of p unique but unobserved factors e1 , . . . , ep . The model will be

                    F M1 − µ1 = l11 C1 + l12 C2 + · · · + l1m Cm + e1

                    F M2 − µ2 = l21 C1 + l22 C2 + · · · + l2m Cm + e2
                                               ◦
                                               ◦
                  F Mp − µp = lp1 C1 + lp2 C2 + · · · + lpm Cm + ep
or, in matrix notation,

                            FM − µ =            LC         +    e
                              (p×1)      (p×m) (m×1)           (p×1)


    The coefficient lij accompanying Cj in the linear combination describing F Mi −
µi is called the loading of the ith forecasting method on the jth common factor,
so the matrix L is the matrix of factor loadings or the factor pattern matrix.
   In this model,
                               E (C) = 0, Cov (C) = I
                                E (e) = 0, Cov (e) = Ψ
                                      E (e · C) = 0

   Then, Σ = LL′ + Ψ. Hence,
                                        m
                                        X
                                               2
                       V ar (F Mi ) =         lij + Ψi ;   i = 1, . . . , p
                                        j=1

                                                       m
                                                       X
                             Cov (F Mi , F Mk ) =            lij lkj
                                                       j=1


                                        Revista Colombiana de Estadística 34 (2011) 347–375

362                                                                     Carlos G. Maté

   Hence, the variancePof the ith forecasting method can be decomposed into two
                        m    2
parts: the first part   j=1 lij denotes the portion of V ar (F Mi ) related to the
common factors and is called the ith communality; and the second term Ψi is the
unique variance, which is not related to the common factors.
    The FA Methodology applied to the Forecasting Data Matrix
    From the observations on the above p forecasting methods obtained for n fore-
cast horizons, which are denoted by x1 , x2 , . . . , xn ; and with the application of
the linear model discussed previously, the FA method is designed to find a small
number of combined forecasts (factors) that represent the data adequately. Noting
the sample covariance matrix by S, we have an estimation of the unknown pop-
ulation covariance matrix Σ. If the off-diagonal elements of S are small or those
of the sample correlation matrix R essentially zero, the forecasting methods are
not related and factor analysis will not be appropriate. In another case, a factor
model can be established and the first problem is to estimate the matrices L and
Ψ.
    Methods giving solutions to this problem are principal component analysis
(PCA), principal factors (PF), maximum likelihood factoring, alpha factoring,
unweighted least square factoring, image factoring and so on. The most commonly
used are PCA and PF. PCA is commonly employed as a preliminary extraction
technique, followed by one or more of the other procedures, perhaps varying the
number of factors, the communality estimates, and the rotational methods in each
run Tabachnik   Fidell (1996). The basic difference between PCA and PF is that
the former focuses on variance and the latter on covariance (communality).
    The goal of PCA in the proposed forecasting context would be to extract max-
imum variance from the forecasts matrix F (t) with a few orthogonal combined
forecasts, while the aim of PF would be to reproduce the correlation matrix R (t)
between forecasting methods with a few orthogonal factors that will act as com-
bined forecasts. Thus, the proposed methodology consists of the following steps.

  1. The reduction of the dimensions of the forecasting matrix F (t) data to a few
     factors or PC (very probably dependents).
  2. The repetition of ‘1’ in order to extract one or two factors, called in the
     context of FA higher-order factors, and the taking of these factors of the
     combined forecasts as the final combination of forecasts. That is, new com-
     binations are created based on the different combined forecasts.

There is a practical case of extracting higher-order factors, in a different setting
to that of this paper (Maté   Calderón 2000).


6. Some Practical Contexts and Application Issues
    In this section, three practical forecasting contexts will be considered. The
usefulness of the proposed methodology for these contexts and for some patterns
of time series will be analyzed.

                                     Revista Colombiana de Estadística 34 (2011) 347–375

Multivariate Analysis in Forecasts Combination                                      363

   Energy Markets
    Forecasting is a very important task for people involved in the management
of energy markets, even when there is a stable economic setting. Energy produc-
ers urgently need automated and accurate forecasts so that they can anticipate
demand, prices and other market variables.
    All over the world, the entire sector is currently undergoing an important
restructuring process towards deregulation and competition. The emergence and
development of this new context implies that the management of energy producing
companies can no longer be based on administrative and centralized procedures:
their profit now depends directly on their own managerial decisions. Decision-
making processes become more complex and risky due to the higher uncertainty
which results from the new operational framework.
    It has been pointed out in previous research that a careful calculation of ex-
pected demand and supply can lead to contracts that enhance the profitability
of companies. Hence, more research for very short run forecasts will be required
(Ramanathan, Engle, Granger, Vahid-Araghi   Brace 1997). In this article, the
development of a number of models to produce very short run forecasts of hourly
system loads was considered. The required forecast horizons vary from 16 to 40
hours from Monday to Thursday, and from 16 to 88 hours on Friday. However, the
availability of forecasts for all week, 168 hours, is normal in energy companies. For
example, Hahn, Meyer-Nieberg   Pickl (2009), is a recent survey of mathematical
methods and ideas which have been used for electricity load forecasting.
    The methodology proposed in our paper can be applied to price forecasts in
energy companies. According to Zhao, Dong, Xu   Wong (2008), electricity price
forecasting is a difficult yet essential task for market participants in a deregulated
electricity market. Pindyck (1999) analyzes the influence of price forecasts on
investment decisions and the choice of products to produce.
    Stock Markets
    Forecasting is a crucial task for brokers and people involved in the management
of stocks. The planning of strategies might be improved with the availability of
forecasts for returns, prices and volatility, in those periods where the day is divided
to provide information about the evolution of a stock or groups of stocks. For
example, if a quarter of an hour is taken as a unit of time division, forecasts for
32 horizons are required in an 8-hour trading day. Obviously, other divisions of
time, like 5 minutes, could be used.
   If, as has been suggested (Makridakis   Winkler 1983), forecasts for the 32
time horizons obtained by using four or five methods are available for the broker,
the use of the proposed methodology might provide more accurate forecasts.
   This approach opens a new alternative in this context because the standard
practice in stock markets is to generate one-step-ahead forecasts. For example,
with respect to the daily stock market data, the use of Artificial Neural Networks
to combine time series forecasts of market volatility from USA, Canada, Japan
and UK has been discussed (Donaldson   Kamstra 1996).




                                     Revista Colombiana de Estadística 34 (2011) 347–375

364                                                                    Carlos G. Maté

   Sales
    Issues concerning the design of forecasting methodologies have been looked at
by other researchers (Winklhofer, Diamantopoulos   Witt 1996). One of them
was the time horizon. Some conclusions were that the majority of firms prepared
sales forecasts on a yearly basis, that the most popular short-term sales forecasting
horizon was one month and that firms operating in highly competitive markets put
more emphasis on short term than on long-term forecasts.
    The above suggests that the proposed approach in this paper will not be use-
ful for many companies that employ sales forecasts. However, the increasingly
competitive context in which some firms develop their activity, in a situation with
some parallelism with that of the energy or stock markets, can increase the need
to consider the desirability of using more forecasting methods and a large number
of forecast horizons. If adopted, these changes in approach could be handled with
the methodology proposed in this paper.
   Seasonal Series
   Series with a seasonal component reproduce the behaviour of the magnitude
every certain period of time. So we can assume that the forecast horizons act
as units of study similar to the problems where multivariate analysis is usually
applied.
   Trending Series
    Series with a trend component do not behave with the same pattern through
several forecast horizons. So the forecast horizons perhaps do not show the same
structure as the units in the usual multivariate analysis problems.
   Cyclical Series
    Series with a cyclical component must come back to a previous structure in
the behaviour of the magnitude at regulars periods of time. So, as with seasonal
series, we can assume that forecast horizons act as units of study similar to the
problems where MAM are usually applied.
   Automation
    One of the key points for a successful implementation of the proposed method-
ology is its automation. For this reason, the issues of versatility, accuracy, speed
and intelligibility must be strongly considered, for as long as a limited amount of
resources (software, knowledge, data and so on) are available.
   Forecasting Methods to Be Included
    Several classic statistical forecasting models (exponential smoothing, ARIMA,
GARCH, and so on) are widely used as part of forecasting systems, giving satis-
factory results when applied in different fields. They provide many possibilities of
modeling for one or several variables since they allow different behaviors and hori-
zons be taken into account. Likewise, they have very intuitive use features and are
very user-friendly, because the parameters they involve represent the underlying
process in a simple way.
   In addition, many of the variables included in the practical applications behave
well in many cases or moments of their history, justifying the view that linear or

                                    Revista Colombiana de Estadística 34 (2011) 347–375

Multivariate Analysis in Forecasts Combination                                     365

classic forecasting models may be seen suitable for such contexts. However, the
possibility of using artificial neural networks and other non-linear methods should
be considered.
    There are several references for a further study of general forecasting methods
(Armstrong 2001, Diebold 2001, Elliott et al. 2006, Makridakis et al. 1998).
    Integration with Rule-Based Forecasting and Expert Systems
    A forecasting technique which integrates judgement and statistical extrapola-
tion is the so-called rule-based forecasting technique. Rule-based forecasting auto-
mates some tasks associated with maintaining a complex body of knowledge, given
in an accessible and modifiable form, to provide more accurate forecasts. There are
several examples of rule-based forecast systems (Collopy   Armstrong 1992, Arm-
strong, Adya   Collopy 2001), and we think the proposed approach could provide
a new way of looking at them.
    The potential and benefits of using expert systems in forecasting tasks, both to
formulate the model and to select the forecasting model, has been demonstrated
(Arinze 1994, Armstrong et al. 2001, Collopy, Adya   Armstrong 2001). The
use of intelligent decision-support systems based on neural network technology for
model selection and forecasting has been explored (Venkatachalam   Sohl 1999).
    The framework developed in this article might be incorporated in the future
into expert systems as well as into intelligent forecasting systems.


7. Conclusions
    Competitive settings, real-time econometrics and deregulated management frame-
works will require an increasing number of forecast horizons, particularly in the
globalised FX market.
    Economists, engineers, forecasters and managers will have at their disposal a
set of forecasts for the magnitudes of interest obtained by using several methods.
    The aim of this paper has been to provide a starting point for the handling of
the above scenario by showing the possibility of using multivariate analysis (espe-
cially principal components analysis and factor analysis) in combining forecasts.
A conceptual framework has been developed and suggestions for using several
multivariate analysis methods to solve the problem of how to effectively combine
forecasts have been made. In addition, a new methodology for the construction of
combined forecasts has been proposed.
   In particular, it has been shown that the employment of PCA in the considered
scenario of FX markets is very promising for:
  1. Reinforcing the properties of easy combinations like that of simple average.
  2. Selecting the methods to include in the combination.
   Moreover, some practical contexts have been considered and the usefulness of
the proposed methodology in those contexts and for some patterns of time series
commented on.

                                    Revista Colombiana de Estadística 34 (2011) 347–375

366                                                                     Carlos G. Maté

    It seems that multivariate analysis may be very useful in combining forecasts.
However, much more research is required to evaluate the exciting possibilities
offered by these methods in forecasting, in general, and in combining economic,
financial or technological forecasts, in particular.


Acknowledgements
   The author acknowledges the Editor of this special issue and two referees all
the suggestions that have proposed, which have helped to improve the first version.
Appendix

A1. Introducción
    El siglo XXI está caracterizándose por ofrecer múltiples opciones para cada
problema y situación del mundo real. Muchos hechos corroboran la afirmación
anterior; por ejemplo una rápida transferencia de conocimientos del mundo acadé-
mico al no académico, una comunidad científica con un conocimiento cada vez más
amplio, programas de ordenador sencillos y flexibles y un incremento en cuanto a
disponibilidad de nuevas tecnologías (véase, como ejemplo de lo anterior, el caso
de la película La red social ).
    En nuestros días la predicción se caracteriza por la disponibilidad de un gran
número de métodos. Se pueden consultar varias fuentes para actualizar el conoci-
miento de los mencionados métodos (por ejemplo, Armstrong 2001, Diebold 2001,
Elliott et al. 2006, Makridakis et al. 1998).
    Además, los horizontes de predicción para las empresas y las instituciones son
cada vez más diferentes, aunque se encuentran relacionados. Quienes toman las de-
cisiones necesitan predicciones relacionadas con el plazo inmediato, así como para
el corto, el mediano y el largo plazo, o incluso para los tres horizontes estándar:
corto, mediano y largo. Por ejemplo, Sánchez-Ubeda   Berzosa (2007) proponen
una aplicación para pronosticar el consumo de gas natural de los usuarios finales
en España, donde la empresa ENAGAS necesita predicciones para un horizonte
de mediano plazo (1 a 3 años) con una resolución muy elevada (días). Otros tra-
bajos que abordan dicho problema son Kang (2003), Andrawis et al. (2011) y las
referencias citadas en ambos.
    La combinación de pronósticos se considera una metodología apropiada para
manejar el escenario anterior, habiendo alcanzado madurez y reconocimiento en los
últimos 40 años (Bates   Granger 1969, Bunn 1988, Clemen 1989, de Menezes et al.
2000, Armstrong 2001, Timmerman 2006). En economía, una aplicación reciente
se dedica a pronosticar el crecimiento del empleo en Estados Unidos (Rapach &

                                    Revista Colombiana de Estadística 34 (2011) 347–375

370                                                                      Carlos G. Maté

Strauss 2008). Además, Kapetanios et al. (2008) constatan que la combinación de
pronósticos por lo general conduce a una reducción en el error de predicción.
    Los escenarios anteriores son conceptualmente adecuados para la aplicación
de los métodos de análisis multivariante (en lo sucesivo MAM). En los últimos
quince años estas técnicas han experimentado de grandes mejoras en cuanto a la
facilidad de uso, la superación de ciertas limitaciones y el reconocimiento de una
utilidad mayor (Hair et al. 1998). En consecuencia, una adaptación de los MAM
a las nuevas tecnologías como bases de datos, Internet, etc., es un área nueva.
    Dado este escenario, este artículo propone el empleo de varios métodos de análi-
sis multivariante clásico para obtener pronósticos combinados. Un artículo reciente
(Poncela et al. 2011) propone el uso de técnicas de reducción de la dimensión en
la combinación de pronósticos. Nuestro enfoque, sin embargo, es diferente porque
considera distintos horizontes de predicción, analiza las posibilidades en la com-
binación de pronósticos del conjunto clave de métodos multivariantes y sugiere
diferentes campos de aplicación, como los mercados financieros o los mercados de
energía.
    Esta versión reducida en español se organiza de la siguiente forma. La sección
A2 se dedica al análisis de un marco de combinación de pronósticos y resalta la
aproximación de los métodos del análisis multivariante. La sección A3 presenta la
utilidad de la metodología propuesta en diferentes contextos prácticos. Por último,
se muestran algunas conclusiones de la investigación.


A2. Combinación de pronósticos bajo el marco del
análisis multivariante
    En lo que sigue se supondrá que estamos interesados en pronosticar una mag-
nitud, Y , para un número grande de horizontes de pronósticos, denotado por n, a
partir de la información sobre la magnitud en diferentes periodos 1, 2, . . . hasta el
momento (denotado por t). Con este objetivo en mente, el profesional de la pre-
dicción dispone de varios pronósticos obtenidos mediante un número de métodos
de predicción, notado por p.
    Por tanto, supondremos que tenemos p pronósticos centrados o no sesgados
de la magnitud Y obtenidos mediante p métodos (o expertos o una combina-
ción de métodos y expertos) (M 1, M 2, . . . , M p) para n horizontes de pronóstico
(H1, H2, . . . , Hn). La notación fij (t) se refiere al pronóstico dado para el horizon-
te i-ésimo por el método o experto j-ésimo, con i = 1, . . . , n y j = 1, . . . , p. Esta
información se puede mostrar en una estructura de matriz (tabla 2), notada por

                                          F (t)

   En el escenario anterior, resultará apropiada la aplicación de los métodos de
análisis multivariante (Johnson   Wichern 2002, Rencher 2002, Hair et al. 1998),
considerando variables los métodos de predicción y unidades los horizontes de
pronóstico.

                                      Revista Colombiana de Estadística 34 (2011) 347–375

Multivariate Analysis in Forecasts Combination                                      371

    A partir de esta información, los MAM se han desarrollado para el estudio
de diferentes problemas en el análisis de datos. En nuestro caso, los pronósticos
se obtienen empleando varios métodos para diferentes horizontes de pronóstico.
Uno de los problemas estudiado es la reducción de las dimensiones del problema
(métodos de pronóstico), cuyo objetivo es facilitar el proceso de asimilación de las
relaciones descubiertas por el analista.
    Otro problema es el proceso de búsqueda de relaciones de dependencia que
simplificaría la comprensión del comportamiento de algunos métodos de predic-
ción, teniendo en cuenta los valores que muestren otros métodos. Por último, un
problema interesante es el análisis de las posibles relaciones de interdependencia
que permitirá detectar relaciones sutiles entre los horizontes de pronóstico.
    Una clasificación inicial de los MAM, aplicada la estructura de la tabla 2 se
resume en la tabla 3, que recoge el uso propuesto de los MAM en la predicción. Nos
referimos a la predicción para diferentes horizontes, los métodos de pronóstico y las
tareas de analizar dependencia e interdependencia entre métodos, o al problema de
reducir el número de métodos, o al de agrupar o clasificar horizontes de pronóstico.
   A continuación se considera brevemente el potencial de los MAM en los cinco
problemas de la tabla 3.
    Problema 1. En nuestro escenario de predicción, la tarea más evidente sería la
reducción de los p pronósticos nosesgados a un número más pequeño de pronósticos
(idealmente uno, o a lo sumo 2), para cada horizonte de pronóstico considerado.
Con este objetivo en mente, métodos como el Análisis de Componentes Principales
(PCA) o el Análisis Factorial (FA), lineal o no lineal, o incluso el Análisis de
Conglomerados aplicado a los métodos de pronóstico, llamarían nuestra atención.
En un contexto general, la aproximación de conglomerados en predicción tiene
una larga tradición. Se puede consultar Kusiak   Li (2010) para una aplicación
reciente en la predicción de la producción de energía eólica.
    Problema 2. Granger   Ramanathan (1984) han sugerido que los métodos
convencionales de combinar pronósticos podrían considerarse en el marco de la
regresión. Por tanto, deberían explorarse los métodos alternativos para manejar
este problema en la Tabla 1.
    Por ejemplo, MANOVA se podría emplear para analizar si hay diferencias signi-
ficativas entre un grupo de pronósticos obtenidos utilizando la misma metodología
(ARIMA, redes neuronales, opiniones expertas, etc.) en diferentes grupos de hori-
zontes de tiempo como corto, mediano o largo plazo. En función de la conclusión
alcanzada, sería diferente la decisión del profesional de la predicción sobre la mejor
forma de combinar.
   CCA se podría utilizar para determinar el tipo de relación (lineal o no lineal)
entre grupos de pronósticos a fin de decidir sobre la posibilidad de reducir el
número de pronósticos que van a considerarse en el problema.
    Problema 3. En función de los métodos de predicción utilizados, la utilidad
de conocer el perfil de los horizontes de pronóstico con respecto a la exactitud está
fuera de duda. Como han manifestado muchos autores, no hay ningún método ni
metodología que supere o rebase al resto en cada problema considerado o en cada

                                     Revista Colombiana de Estadística 34 (2011) 347–375

372                                                                    Carlos G. Maté

horizonte de tiempo. Por consiguiente, parece que el DA y la LR podrían ayudar
en investigaciones futuras sobre estas cuestiones. En concreto, las aproximaciones
en FOREX plantean nuevos retos en finanzas internacionales.
   Problema 4. Identificar grupos de horizontes de pronóstico similares con res-
pecto a una serie de métodos o metodologías de pronósticos haría posible la confi-
guración de diferentes tipos de combinación para cada conglomerado de horizontes
de pronósticos.
   Problema 5. Este es uno de los problemas más complejos en los MAM. Eso
sucede en la tabla 3. Aquí, los Mínimos Cuadrados Parciales (PLS) podrían ser
una metodología útil al resolver el problema comentado de decidir qué métodos se
deberían incluir al agrupar en conglomerados los horizontes de pronóstico.



A3. Algunos contextos prácticos y algunas
cuestiones de aplicación
    En esta sección se consideran tres contextos prácticos de predicción. Se analiza
la utilidad de la metodología propuesta en dichos contextos, así como en algunos
patrones de series temporales.
   Mercados de energía
    La predicción es una tarea muy importante para las personas que trabajan
gestionando los mercados de energía, incluso cuando hay un escenario económico
estable. Los productores de energía necesitan con urgencia pronósticos exactos
que se encuentren automatizados, de manera que puedan anticipar la demanda,
los precios y otras variables del mercado.
    En la mayor parte de las zonas económicas más relevantes del mundo, el sector
de la energía está acometiendo un importante proceso de reestructuración cuya
meta es la competencia y la liberalización de cuestiones de regulación que impiden
la libre competencia de los productores y proveedores de la energía. Todo esto
implica que la gestión de las empresas productoras de energía ya no puede estar
basada en procedimientos administrativos y centralizados; su beneficio ahora de-
pende directamente de las decisiones gerenciales que se tomen. Los procesos de
la toma de decisiones son cada vez más complejos y arriesgados, debido a la ma-
yor incertidumbre que resulta del nuevo marco de operaciones en los mercados de
energía del siglo XXI.
    En investigaciones previas se ha resaltado que un cálculo cuidadoso de la de-
manda esperada y de la oferta en los mercados de energía puede conducir a contra-
tos que incrementen los beneficios de las empresas. Por tanto, se va a requerir más
investigación para pronósticos a muy corto plazo (Ramanathan et al. 1997). En
este artículo, se ha considerado el desarrollo de una serie de modelos para producir
pronósticos a muy corto plazo en sistemas de demanda horaria. La disponibilidad
de pronósticos para toda la semana, 168 horas, es el estándar en las empresas de
energía. Por ejemplo, Hahn et al. (2009) recogen información de una encuesta so-

                                    Revista Colombiana de Estadística 34 (2011) 347–375

Multivariate Analysis in Forecasts Combination                                      373

bre métodos matemáticos e ideas que se han empleado para predecir la demanda
de electricidad.
    La metodología propuesta en este artículo se puede aplicar al cálculo de pronós-
ticos de precios en las empresas de energía. Según Zhao et al. (2008), obtener estos
pronósticos de precios constituye una tarea difícil pero esencial para los participan-
tes en un mercado de electricidad desregulado. Pindyck (1999) analiza la influencia
de los pronósticos de precios sobre las decisiones de inversión y la elección de los
productos que se van a producir.
   Mercados de acciones
    El cálculo de pronósticos resulta una tarea crucial para los agentes de bolsa y
las personas involucradas en la gestión de las acciones. Se podría mejorar la pla-
nificación de estrategias mediante la disponibilidad de pronósticos para retornos,
precios y volatilidad, en algunos periodos del día. Por ejemplo, si un cuarto de
hora se toma como unidad de división del tiempo, se van a necesitar pronósticos
para 32 horizontes en un día de 8 horas. Obviamente, se utilizan con mucha fre-
cuencia otras divisiones de tiempo; por ejemplo, 5 minutos. Por tanto, si como se
ha sugerido (Makridakis   Winkler 1983) se obtuvieran pronósticos para los 32
horizontes de tiempo utilizando 4 o 5 métodos, el uso de la metodología propuesta
podría proporcionar pronósticos más exactos a los agentes de bolsa.
   Ventas
    En algunas investigaciones (Winklhofer et al. 1996) se ha estudiado la cuestión
del horizonte de tiempo en el ámbito de los pronósticos en ventas. Algunas conclu-
siones fueron que la mayoría de las empresas preparaba pronósticos de ventas sobre
una base anual, que el horizonte más popular en los pronósticos de ventas a corto
plazo era un mes y que las empresas que operan en mercados muy competitivos
ponen más énfasis en el corto plazo que en el largo.
    Esto sugiere que la aproximación propuesta en este artículo no será útil para
muchas empresas que emplean pronósticos de ventas. Sin embargo, el contexto cre-
cientemente competitivo donde algunas empresas desarrollan su actividad, en una
situación con cierto paralelismo con la de los mercados de energía y la de los merca-
dos de acciones, puede incrementar la necesidad de considerar interesante emplear
más métodos de predicción y un gran número de horizontes de pronóstico. Una
vez que estos cambios fueran adoptados se podrían manejar con la aproximación
propuesta.
   Series estacionales
    Series con una componente estacional reproducen el comportamiento de la mag-
nitud cada cierto periodo. En consecuencia, se puede suponer que los horizontes
de pronóstico actúan como unidades de estudio, de manera similar a los problemas
donde el análisis multivariante se aplica habitualmente.
   Series con tendencia
    Las series que muestran una componente de tendencia no se comportan con
el mismo patrón a través de varios horizontes de pronóstico. Por consiguiente, en
esta situación los horizontes de pronóstico quizás no muestran la misma estructura
que las unidades en los problemas usuales del análisis multivariante.

                                     Revista Colombiana de Estadística 34 (2011) 347–375

374                                                                    Carlos G. Maté

   Series cíclicas
    Las series que presentan una componente de ciclo con sus correspondientes
puntos de giro deben retornar a una estructura previa en el comportamiento de la
magnitud. Por tanto, como ocurre con las series estacionales, se puede suponer que
los horizontes de pronóstico actúan como unidades de estudio, de manera similar
a los problemas donde los MAM se aplican habitualmente.
   Automatización
   Uno de los puntos clave para una implantación con éxito de la metodología
propuesta es la automatización de la misma. Por esta razón, las cuestiones de
versatilidad, exactitud, velocidad e inteligibilididad se deben considerar de manera
rotunda, porque solo habrá disponible una cantidad limitada de recursos (software,
conocimiento, datos, etc.).
   Métodos de cálculo de pronósticos a incluir
    Varias metodologías de pronóstico clásicas (alisado exponencial, ARIMA,
GARCH, etc.) se emplean ampliamente como parte de los sistemas de predicción,
dando resultados satisfactorios cuando se aplican en diferentes campos. Propor-
cionan muchas posibilidades de modelado para una o varias variables, puesto que
permiten considerar horizontes y comportamientos diferentes. Además, presentan
rasgos muy intuitivos y son muy favorables, ya que los parámetros que manejan
representan al proceso de manera simple.
   Además, muchas de las variables incluidas en las aplicaciones prácticas se com-
portan bien en muchos casos o momentos de su historia, justificando la opinión
de que los modelos lineales o clásicos de cálculo de pronósticos se pueden ver ade-
cuados para tales contextos. Sin embargo, debería considerarse la posibilidad de
emplear Redes Neuronales Artificiales y otros métodos no lineales.
    Hay varias referencias para un estudio detallado de los métodos generales de
cálculo de pronósticos (Makridakis et al. 1998, Diebold 2001, Elliott et al. 2006).
   Integración con predicción basada en reglas y sistemas expertos
    Una técnica de pronóstico que integra opinión experta y extrapolación esta-
dística se denomina técnica de pronóstico basada en reglas. La predicción basada
en reglas automatiza algunas tareas asociadas al mantenimiento de un cuerpo
complejo de conocimiento, dado en una forma accesible y modificable, a fin de
proporcionar pronósticos más exactos. Existen varios ejemplos de sistemas de ela-
boración de pronósticos basados en reglas (Collopy   Armstrong 1992, Armstrong
et al. 2001). El enfoque propuesto podría proporcionar una nueva perspectiva a
los citados sistemas.
    En distintos trabajos (Arinze 1994, Armstrong et al. 2001, Collopy et al. 2001)
se ha mostrado el potencial y los beneficios de emplear sistemas expertos en las
tareas de predicción, tanto para formular el modelo como para seleccionarlo. Tam-
bién, se ha explorado el uso de sistemas inteligentes de apoyo a la decisión basa-
dos en redes neuronales para la selección del modelo y el cálculo de pronósticos
(Venkatachalam   Sohl 1999).
   El marco desarrollado en este artículo se podría incorporar en el futuro tanto
en sistemas expertos como en sistemas inteligentes de cálculo de pronósticos.

                                    Revista Colombiana de Estadística 34 (2011) 347–375

Multivariate Analysis in Forecasts Combination                                     375

A4. Conclusiones
    Entornos competitivos, econometría en tiempo real y marcos de gestión libe-
ralizados van a requerir un número creciente de horizontes de pronósticos; parti-
cularmente en el mercado globalizado de divisas.
   Economistas, ingenieros, gerentes y profesionales de la predicción tendrán a su
disposición, para las magnitudes de interés, un conjunto de pronósticos obtenidos
mediante el empleo de varios métodos.
    El objetivo de este artículo es proporcionar un punto inicial para el manejo
del escenario anterior, mostrando la posibilidad de utilizar análisis multivariante
(especialmente análisis de componentes principales y análisis factorial) al combinar
pronósticos. Se ha presentado un marco conceptual y se han dado sugerencias para
utilizar métodos de análisis multivariante para resolver el problema de combinar
pronósticos de forma eficaz. Además, se ha propuesto una nueva metodología para
la construcción de pronósticos combinados.
    En concreto, se ha mostrado que el empleo de PCA en el escenario considerado
de los mercados de divisas es muy prometedor para lo siguiente.

  1. Reafirmar ciertas propiedades que tienen las combinaciones sencillas de pro-
     nósticos, como el promedio simple.
  2. Seleccionar los métodos que se van a incluirse en la combinación.

    Asimismo, se han considerado algunos contextos prácticos y la utilidad de la
metodología propuesta en estos para algunos patrones de series temporales.
    Parece que el análisis multivariante puede ser muy útil a la hora de combinar
pronósticos. Sin embargo, se requiere mucha más investigación a fin de evaluar las
excitantes posibilidades que ofrecen estos métodos en la predicción, en general, y
al combinar pronósticos económicos, financieros o tecnológicos, en particular.


Agradecimientos
    El autor agradece muy sinceramente al Editor de este número especial y a
los dos árbitros que han revisado el manuscrito todas las sugerencias que han
propuesto, las cuales han contribuido a mejorar notablemente la primera versión
del artículo.

References
Andrawis R R, Atiya A F, El Shishiny H. Combination of long term and short term forecasts, with application to tourism demand forecasting.(2011). International Journal of Forecasting.
Arinze B. Selecting appropriate forecasting models using rule induction.(1994). Omega.
Armstrong J S. Combined forecasts in Principles of Forecasting: A Handbook for Researchers and Practitioners.(2001). Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Armstrong J S, Adya M, Collopy, F. Rule-based forecasting:using domain knowledge in time series extrapolation in Principles of Forecasting, A Handbook for Researchers and Practitioners.(2001). Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Bank for International Settlements. Central bank survy of foreign exhcange and derivatives market activity in april 2001.(2001). Bank for International Settlements.
Basilevsky A. Statistical Factor Analysis and Related Methods Theory and Applications.(2004). John Wiley and Sons.
Bates J, Granger C. The combination of forecasts.(1969). Operations Research Quarterly.
Bunn D W. Combining forecasts.(1988). European Journal of Operational Research.
Bunn D W. Forecasting with more than one model.(1989). Journal of Forecasting.
Clemen R T. Combining forecasts: A review and annotated bibliography. (1989). International Journal of Forecasting.
Clemen R T, Winkler R L. Combining economic forecasts. (1986). Journal of Business and Economic Statistics.
Collopy F, Adya M, Armstrong J S. Expert Systems for Forecasting In Principles of Forecasting: A Handbook for Researchers and Practitioners.(2001). Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Collopy F, Armstrong J S. Rule-based forecasting: Development and validation of an expert system approach to combining time series extrapolations. (1992). Management Science.
de Menezes L M, Bunn D W, Taylor J W. Review of guidelines for the use of combined forecasts. (2000). European Journal of Operational Research.
Diebold F X. Elements of Forecasting.(2001). South-Western.
Donaldson R G, Kamstra M. Forecast combining with neural networks.(1996). Journal of Forecasting.
Dunis C, Williams M. Modelling and trading the EUR/USD exchange rate: Do neural network models perform better?. (2005). Derivatives Use Trading and Regulation.
Elliott G, Granger C W J, Timmerman A. Handbook of Economic Forecasting. (2006). Elsevier.
Eun C S, Sabherwal S. Forecasting exchange rates: Do banks know better?. (2002). Global Finance Journal.
Gorsuch R L. Factor Analysis.(1983). Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Granger C W J, Ramanathan R. Improved methods of combining forecasts. (1984). Journal of Forecasting.
Hahn H, Meyer Nieberg S, Pickl S. Electric load forecasting methods: Tools for decision making. (2009). European Journal of Operational Research.
Hair J F J, Anderson R E, Tatham R L, Black W C.Multivariate Data Analysis with Readings.(1998). Prentice Hall: Englewood Cliffs.
Jobson J D. Applied Multivariate Data Analysis, Vol II: Categorical and Multivariate Methods. (1992). Springer-Verlag.
Johnson R A, Wichern D W. Applied Multivariate Statistical Analysis.(2002).Prentice Hall: Englewood Cliffs.
Kang I B. Multi-period forecasting using different models for different horizons: an application to US economic time series data. (2003). International Journal of Forecasting.
Kapetanios G, Labhard V, Price S. Forecast combination and the bank of England’s suite of statistical forecasting models. (2010). Economic Modelling.
Kilian L, Taylor M P. Why is it difficult to beat the random walk forecast of exchange rates?. (2003). Journal of International Economics.
King M R, Rime D. The $4 trillion question: what explains FX growth since the 2007 survey?. (2010). BIS Quarterly Review.
Kusiak A, Li W. Short-term prediction of wind power with a clustering approach. (2010). Renewable Energy.
Makridakis S, Wheelwright S C, Hyndman R. Forecasting Methods and Applications. (1998). John Wiley Sons.
Makridakis S, Winkler R L. Averages of forecasts: Some results.(1983). Management Science.
Maté C, Calderón R. Exploring the characteristics of rotating electric machines with factor analysis. (2000). Journal of Applied Statistics.
Pindyck R S. Long-run evolution of energy prices.(1999). Energy Journal.
Poncela P, Rodríguez J, Sánchez Mangas R, Senra E. Forecast combination through dimension reduction techniques.(2011).International Journal of Forecasting.
Posen A S. Avoiding a currency war.(2004). The International Economy.
Ramanathan R, Engle R, Granger C W J, Vahid Araghi F, Brace C. Short-run forecasts of electricity loads and peaks.(1997).International Journal of Forecasting.
Rapach D E, Strauss J K. Forecasting US employment growth using forecast combining methods. (2008).Journal of Forecasting.
Rencher A C. Methods of Multivariate Analysis.(2002).John Wiley Sons.
Sánchez Ubeda E F, Berzosa A. Modeling and forecasting industrial end-use natural gas consumption. (2007). Energy Economics.
Tabachnik B G, Fidell L. Using Multivariate Statistics.(1996).HarperCollins Publishers.
Timmerman A. Forecast combinations.(2006). Elsevier.
Venkatachalam A R, Sohl J E. An intelligent model selection and forecasting system. (1999). Journal of Forecasting.
Winkler R L, Makridakis S. The combination of forecasts. (1983). Journal of the Royal Statistical Society.
Winklhofer H, Diamantopoulos A, Witt S. Forecasting practice: A review of the empirical literature and an agenda for future research.(1996). International Journal of Forecasting.
Zhao J H, Dong Z Y, Xu Z, Wong K P. A statistical approach for interval forecasting of the electricity price. (2008). IEEE Transactions on Power Systems.