Skeptical and Optimistic Robust Priors for Clinical Trials
University of Texas;University of Puerto Rico
Abstract
A useful technique from the subjective Bayesian viewpoint, is to ask the subject matter researchers and other parties involved, such as pharmaceutical companies and regulatory bodies, for reasonable optimistic and pessimistic priors regarding the effectiveness of a new treatment. Up to now, the proposed skeptical and optimistic priors have been limited to conjugate priors, though there is no need for this limitation. The same reasonably adversarial points of view can take with robust priors. Robust priors permit a much faster and efficient resolution of the disagreement between the conclusions based on skeptical and optimistic priors. As a consequence, robust Bayesian clinical trials tend to be shorter. Our proposal in this paper is to use Cauchy and intrinsic robust priors for both skeptical and optimistic priors leading to results more closely related with the sampling data when prior and data are in conflict. In other words, the use of robust priors removes the dogmatism implicit in conjugate priors. Dogmatism here has very precise meaning: Conjugate priors affect the posterior conclusions by a fixed rate, regardless if there is a conflict between prior and data. Robust priors are automatically discounted by Bayes Theorem in the presence of conflict.
Key words: Clinical trials, Bayesian robustness, Prior distribution.
Resumen
Ensayos clínicos bajo un enfoque de estadística Bayesiana están adquiriendo cada vez mayor importancia. Anteriormente se sugirió una idea que ha dado ventaja al uso de previas bayesianas: suponer dos densidades a priori con información muy distinta sobre la efectividad de un nuevo tratamiento: una previa escéptica que refleje pesimismo sobre la superioridad del tratamiento nuevo. Esta es la posición de los organismos reguladores que autorizan o no los nuevos medicamentos que deben ser vendidos en el mercado. También proponen una densidad previa optimista (o “entusiasta”) que refleja la posición de los investigadores y compañías farmacéuticas que proponen el nuevo tratamiento. Esta diversidad de opiniones es sumamente útil y queremos preservarla. En la propuesta original, sin embargo, se supone que la forma funcional de las densidades previas es normal, lo cual es más simple de analizar y asignar. Infortunadamente, la simplicidad exige un precio muy grande. Para que haya acuerdo entre los dos análisis se necesita muchísima información muestral. En este artículo se propone mantener las dos previas que representan puntos de vista adversos, pero con una forma funcional de colas gruesas, como la densidad Cauchy. Las previas robustas permiten una resolución del desacuerdo de forma más rápida y eficiente; por tanto, los ensayos clínicos tienden a ser más cortos. Se asume un concepto de dogmatismo muy preciso: las previas conjugadas afectan las conclusiones en una tasa fija, sin importar si hay conflicto entre la verosimilitud y la densidad previa. Además, las previas robustas de colas gruesas son automáticamente descontadas en presencia de conflicto, por el teorema de Bayes en favor de la información dada por los datos.
Palabras clave: distribución a priori, ensayos clínicos, robustez bayesiana.



1. Introduction
    Clinical trials are contentious. Pharmaceutical companies are eager to show
that their new drug, on which they may have been invested millions of dollars,
is a substantial improvement over the current treatment. Government regulatory
agencies take the opposite view and ask for substantial evidence that the new drug
is not less effective than the current standard.
    Bayesian statistics permits a useful technique for modeling adversarial posi-
tions by using two prior distributions on the parameters of interest. One, the
optimistic prior, corresponds to positive expectations. The other, the pessimistic
prior, corresponds to a more skeptical position.
   To be more specific, let us consider the following one-sided hypothesis test.
Suppose that we have two medical treatments with corresponding probabilities of
events p1 and p2 . The events may be for instance “disease recurrence” or “deaths”.
The Odds Ratio is defined as

                                          p1 /(1 − p1 )
                                  OR =
                                          p2 /(1 − p2 )

                                      Revista Colombiana de Estadística 34 (2011) 333–345

Skeptical and Optimistic Robust Priors for Clinical Trials                           335

and to make the assumption of normality more realistic, the focus is on the pa-
rameter θ = log(OR). Often the test of interest is the following:

                            H0 : θ ≥ θH , vs H1 : θ < θH                             (1)

  Here, H1 is the region of substantial improvement achieved by the new treat-
ment over the standard one. Here, θH < 0, corresponding to OR < 1, for example
OR = 0.5, the point of 50% of improvement.
    Part of the clever proposal by Spiegelhalter, Abrams   Myles (2004) is to
assume two priors: πS and πO . The skeptical position (say the government regu-
latory body attitude) is to first center the prior on the point of no difference, i.e.
θ = 0, and secondly to give only a small probability, denoted by ξ, say ξ = 0.05
or ξ = 0.025 to the improvement (i.e H1 ), that is
                                          Z θH
                             PS (H1 ) =          πS (θ)dθ = ξ                        (2)
                                           −∞


   The optimistic position is centered on θH and it gives only probability ξ that
there is no benefit with the new treatment (the investigator position), so
                                        Z ∞
                           PO (θ > 0) =     π0 (θ)dθ = ξ                      (3)
                                            0


    If under the skeptical prior, the posterior probability of H1 is larger than 1 − γ,
say 1 − γ = 0.95, that is, if under the skeptical prior P (H1 | Data , πS ) > 1 − γ,
then to decide in favor of H1 is safe. If with the optimistic prior P (θ > 0 |
 Data , πO ) > 1 − γ, to decide that there is not benefit with the new treatment is
safe. If there is disagreement between the procedures then the trial is inconclusive,
given the information so far collected.
   This approach is intuitively satisfying. However, this framework may be overly
cautious and lead to an enormous delay in the decisions. The implementation
proposed in Spiegelhalter et al. (2004) uses conjugate priors, which lead to simple
computations. However, we show in this article that we may preserve the useful
framework of skeptical and optimistic priors without the dogmatism inherent in
conjugate priors.
    Pericchi   Smith (1992) showed some aspects of the robustness of the Student-t
prior for a normal location parameter and provided approximations to the posterior
moments in the model Student-t/normal. The Cauchy prior, as a Student-t with
one degree of freedom, can be used in this context as well. However, for normal
log-odds there is a robust prior proposed by Berger (1985) that leads to a closed
form posterior and moments, a sort of the “best of both worlds”. The “intrinsic
prior” was obtained in Berger   Pericchi (1996) as the implicit prior to which the
arithmetic intrinsic Bayes factor converges, and it turns out that it is a limiting
case of Berger’s prior. In Fúquene, Cook   Pericchi (2009), robust priors are
proposed for clinical trials. But the priors studied there are clinical priors based
on previous trials. Here, we propose a class of robust priors, a novel proposal to the

                                      Revista Colombiana de Estadística 34 (2011) 333–345

336                                        John Cook, Jairo Fúquene   Luis Pericchi

best of our knowledge, that improves the class of Normal skeptical and optimistic
priors originally proposed by Spiegelhalter et al. (2004). Note that the original
proposal by Spiegelhalter et al. (2004) propose a class of priors of two elements:
the skeptical and the optimistic normal priors. We propose a class of robust priors,
again of two elements: the skeptical and the optimistic robust prior. Effectively,
however, both these classes allow a substantial variation on prior assessments. We
illustrate the improvement in terms of an example and also provide mathematical
results that lead us to expect that the speed of convergence of the robust class is
substantially higher than the normal class.


2. Illustration: Skeptical and Optimistic Robust
   Priors
    A useful suggestion under the subjective Bayesian viewpoint, taken by Spiegel-
halter, Freedman   Parmar (1994), is to ask the subject matter researchers, for
reasonably optimistic and pessimistic priors (regarding the effectiveness of a new
treatment). On the log-odds scale, a skeptical prior on the amount of improvement
has mean zero (i.e., no difference between treatments, θ = 0) and a substantial
probability that the new treatment is not better. The prior scale is assessed in
reference to an optimistic hypothesis θH (say θH = −0.69, which corresponds to a
50% improvement, see below). Then a small (skeptical) probability ξ is assessed,
for example ξ = 0.025: that the effect of the treatment is equal or better than
θH . For the Cauchy prior, the skeptical parameters are very easy to assess. The
location µ is zero and the scale β = θH / tan(π(ξ − 1/2)). In Fúquene et al. (2009),
other robust heavy tailed priors are considered, apart from the Cauchy, and several
mathematical results are presented. Two such priors are the Intrinsic Prior, calcu-
lated by Berger   Pericchi (1996), and the so called Berger’s prior (Berger 1985).
There is a close relationship between the Intrinsic and Berger’s prior, and for the
most part we present the results for the Intrinsic prior, for which the location (µ)
is zero and the scale, τ , is found by solving the following equation

                                               (θ − µ)2
                                                       
                       Z θH        1 − exp −
                                1                 τ2
                                √               2
                                                          dθ = ξ                 (4)
                        −∞ 2 π           (θ − µ) /τ

    For the optimistic priors, the assessments are similar, except that the location
is changed to µ = θH = −0.69, that is the location now placed at the point of 50%
improvement. The scales are obtained by placing 1 − ξ probability on H1 . For
example, in equation (3) the right hand side is changed from ξ to 1 − ξ.


Illustrative example. Suppose that a new drug is compared with a conven-
tional treatment. With the conventional treatment, 26 out of 97 patients died
(26.8%). Only 13 out of 193 patients died with the new drug (6.7%). We wish to
test the hypothesis that the improvement with the new treatment is at least 50%

                                    Revista Colombiana de Estadística 34 (2011) 333–345

Skeptical and Optimistic Robust Priors for Clinical Trials                           337

of reduction of the odds of death. Is there enough evidence to make a skeptical
prior to give over 90% of posterior probability?
    We now make the comparison of two analysis: The first combining the normal
log odds coupled with a normal skeptical prior (with the current data). Alterna-
tively, we assume heavy-tailed Cauchy and intrinsic priors, with the same location
and the same probabilities of the region of interest as the normal prior. Thus
we assume that the normal, Cauchy, and intrinsic skeptical priors have all mean
log(OR) = 0 and with a 95% interval running from 50% reduction in odds of death
(log(OR) = −0.69) to a 50% increase (log(OR) = 0.69).
    In the normal prior case, we assume πn (θ) = N [0, σ 2 /n0 ], and n0 is referred to
as “the number of prior observations”. On a log(OR) scale, this prior has a 95%
interval from −0.69 to 0.69 and so has a standard deviation 0.69/1.96 = 0.35 (for
ξ = 0.025) and hence the number of prior observations is n0 = 4/0.352 = 32.3.
    For Cauchy and intrinsic priors the scale is 0.05 and 0.06 respectively, so that
the prior probability of the region on which there is a reduction of risk of 50% or
more is 0.025. We use the normal approximation for binary data for the log-odds
with the approximate standard error recommended in Spiegelhalter et al. (2004,
pp. 26) for 2 × 2 tables, following their suggestion of an standard error of the
likelihood normal and normal/normal posterior model equal to σ = 2.
    As we anticipated above, assume that the evidence arising from the study
about 30-day mortality was 26/97 on control and 13/193 on new treatment. If the
ratio of the odds of death following the new treatment to the odds of death on the
conventional is OR < 1 then the data favors the new treatment. We have that the
estimated log(OR) is yn = −1.6 (OR = 0.2 or 80% risk reduction) with estimated
standard error 0.36 and n = 4/0.362 = 30.5, which in this case is approximately
the same weight of the prior n0 = 32.3, as calculated above.
    We use the R (R Development Core Team 2009) package named ClinicalRobust-
Priors, available from the Comprehensive R Archive Network at http://CRAN.R-
project.org/package=ClinicalRobustPriors, developed by one of the authors, which
can be used to compute probabilities and figures for the prior, likelihood and pos-
terior models.
   The posterior mean in the normal/normal
                                   √       model is (n0 µ + nX n )/(n0 + n) =
−0.77 with standard deviation σ/ n0 + n = 0.25; the estimated odds ratio is
e−0.77 = 0.46 or 54% risk reduction.
    In the Cauchy/normal and intrinsic/normal, models the posterior mean is
−1.48 (e−1.48 = 0.22 or 78% risk reduction) with standard deviation 0.32. In the
normal/normal an 95% credible interval on the log(OR) scale is between −1.27 and
−0.28, that corresponds to odds ratios from 0.28 to 0.75, or a 95% probability that
the true risk reduction lies between 25% and 72%. For the Cauchy/normal and
intrinsic/normal posterior models, the 95% credible interval shows that the true
risk reduction lies between 57% and 88%. The likelihood shows a risk reduction
between 60% and 90%.
   In Figure 1 we can see that the normal skeptical prior is more dogmatic than
both the Cauchy and intrinsic skeptical priors. When there is a discrepancy be-

                                      Revista Colombiana de Estadística 34 (2011) 333–345

338                                                                        John Cook, Jairo Fúquene   Luis Pericchi

tween prior and data, the robust priors are discarded to some extent in favor of
the likelihood, but the normal prior is not.

    As a counterbalance to the skeptical priors, Spiegelhalter et al. (1994) suggest
an “enthusiastic” (or “optimistic” as we call it here) prior centered on the alternative
hypothesis and with a high chance that the true treatment benefit is over 50%.
In this example, the alternative hypothesis is θH = −0.69 (50% risk reduction)
and the high chance is 1 − ξ = 0.975. The scale and prior sample size are the
same as with the skeptical priors. Figure 2 display the results. The posterior
mean in the normal/normal conjugate model is −1.13 (e−1.13 = 0.32 or 68% risk
reduction), much closer than the −1.39 (e−1.39 = 0.24 or 76% risk reduction) of the
Cauchy/normal or intrinsic/normal models. The scale for the posterior models are
0.25 and 0.34, respectively, with normal and Cauchy (or intrinsic) priors. For the
Optimistic prior, there is no strong conflict with the likelihood and the inference
with normal and robust priors is similar.
Figure 2: Optimistic priors, likelihoods and posterior models:                                                                normal/normal,
          cauchy/normal and intrinsic/normal.



Conclusion for the example. The quantity of interest is the set of a reduction
of risk of at least of 50%, that is H1 . For the normal skeptical prior, the posterior
probability can be calculated in the log-odds scale as Φ((−0.69 + 0.77)/0.25) =
Φ(0.32) = 0.62. This contrast with both the Cauchy and intrinsic skeptical ro-
bust priors, for which this probability is 0.95. In other words, the hypothesis
H1 is supported by the data, even assuming the Cauchy and intrinsic skepti-
cal robust priors. This is not the case with the normal skeptical prior. Next
consider the optimistic priors case. This probability with the normal prior is
Φ((0 + 1.13)/0.25) = Φ(4.52) = 0.99. The same probability is obtained with both
the Cauchy and the intrinsic. Thus, in the example, the skeptical and optimistic
robust priors have converged in over 95% of probability of the region of substantial
improvement. Unfortunately, using the normal priors, the procedure has not yet
converged, and much more evidence is still required for a definitive conclusion,
and this is due entirely to the particular functional form chosen for the prior, and
not to its condition of skepticism. In our experience, the results obtained by using
any of the considered robust priors, Cauchy or intrinsic or Berger’s prior, yield
essentially the same results.

                                                                    Revista Colombiana de Estadística 34 (2011) 333–345

340                                        John Cook, Jairo Fúquene   Luis Pericchi

    In next section, we demonstrated the behavior observed in the illustration is a
general feature of robust and normal priors, rather than specific phenomenon of
this example.


3. Asymptotic Results
   In this section we show that robust priors can “change their mind” more readily
than conjugate priors by looking at asymptotic properties of posterior means under
each type of prior. When both the skeptical and optimistic prior are robust, they
may reach agreement more quickly than if the two priors were not robust.
   Consider a single sample y from a normal(θ, σ 2 ) distribution where θ has a
conjugate normal(0, τ 2 ) prior. It is well-known that the posterior distribution on
θ has mean
                                           τ2
                                                y.
                                       τ 2 + σ2

   If we use a Cauchy(0, 1) prior rather than a normal(0, τ 2 ) prior on θ above,
the posterior mean of θ is
                                         
                                          1
                                  y−O
                                          y
as y → ∞. See the technical report Cook (2010) for the derivation of this asymp-
totic result.
    Under the normal prior, the posterior mean of θ under-estimates the data y by
a constant ratio that depends on the relative scales of the sampling distribution
and the prior distribution. Under the Cauchy prior, however, the posterior mean
of θ asymptotically approaches the value of y, independent of the scales of the
sampling and prior distributions. This is illustrated by Figure 3.
   Next we consider the case of n samples yi with mean y and consider n → ∞
the behavior of the posterior mean. Under a normal(0, τ 2 ) prior, the posterior
mean is given by
                                         σ2
                                                  
                         1                         1
                           σ2
                               y =   1 −    2
                                              + O    2
                                                       y
                      1 + nτ 2
                                         nτ        n

   Under a Cauchy prior, however, the posterior mean is

                                (y 2 − 3)y σ 2
                                                            
                                                        1
                           y+                  +O
                                (1 + y 2 )2 n           n2

    The rate at which the posterior mean converges to y depends on τ in the case
of the normal prior and on y in the case of the Cauchy prior. For any value of τ ,
the convergence is faster under the Cauchy prior for sufficiently large values of y.
    We now obtain results for Berger’s prior that are quite similar to those above
for the Cauchy prior. If we observe n samples from a normal(θ, σ 2 ) distribution

                                    Revista Colombiana de Estadística 34 (2011) 333–345

Skeptical and Optimistic Robust Priors for Clinical Trials                                              341

                                      8

                                      7
                                                Empirical
                                                Cauchy prior
                                      6         Normal prior




                     Posterior mean
                                      5

                                      4

                                      3

                                      2

                                      1

                                      00   1              3       4       5   6   7   8
                                                 2
                                                              Observation y
Figure 3: Posterior mean of θ under robust and conjugate priors compared to empirical
          value.



and θ has Berger’s prior with location 0, the posterior mean of θ is

                                                     2σ 2 y              2σ 2
                                                                   −
                                                            ny
                                      (σ 2 + nβ 2 ) exp σ2 +nβ 2   −1    ny

where y is the sample mean of the observations as shown in Fúquene et al. (2009).
Therefore as a single sample y → ∞, the posterior mean of θ is

                                                     2σ 2
                                               y−         + O(exp(−y 2 ))
                                                      y
Also, as n → ∞, the posterior mean of θ is

                                                     σ2 2
                                               y−         + O(exp(−n))
                                                     n y

    These results show that, for Cauchy and Berger priors, the influence of the
prior diminishes more quickly when the data are far from the location parameter
of the prior. When skeptical and optimistic priors using either of these robust
distributions, the priors will reach consensus more quickly than corresponding
conjugate priors when the data are in conflict with one of the priors.


4. Conclusions
    The idea of skeptical and optimistic priors is an important one, and useful to
increase the impact of Bayesian statistics in the whole of medical statistics. As
introduced by Spiegelhalter et al. (2004), this idea has two components. The first
is that the prior probability of the region where the new treatment is substantially
better than the current treatment is high for the optimistic prior and low for
the skeptical prior. The second component is the specific shape of the priors

                                                         Revista Colombiana de Estadística 34 (2011) 333–345

342                                        John Cook, Jairo Fúquene   Luis Pericchi

(effectively a class of two priors), that was assumed normal priors by Spiegelhalter
et al. (2004). We show here, to the best of our knowledge for the first time, that
the behavior of the procedure, even complying with the first component, crucially
depends on the shape of the priors, particularly the tail size. We illustrate that
with an example, similar as those in Spiegelhalter et al. (except that the equivalent
sample sizes of the likelihood and priors are about the same in our example)
and show it mathematically in Section 3. Furthermore, we put forward that the
idea of skeptical and optimistic prior is actually improved by the use of heavy
tailed priors, because the procedure is “less stubborn” and even though it places a
handicap on both hypothesis, it is more willing to change its mind when there is
clear information in favor of one of the hypothesis. As a consequence, the robust
procedure put forward here is able to embrace better treatments or to discard bad
ones in a more efficient manner: it is more likely that the optimistic and skeptical
procedure reach a consensus under robust heavy tailed priors than under normal
priors. Finally, the use of different heavy tailed priors presented here, the Cauchy,
Berger’s or Intrinsic priors lead to essentially equivalent statistical behavior, and
thus the choice among them is more a matter of convenience and taste. But the
difference between normal and robust skeptical/optimistic priors is substantial,
and the robust version of the idea seems to us much more acceptable for the
players involved.


Acknowledgements
    We are grateful to two anonymous referees and to the special editor for their
constructive suggestions that made our article much clearer and easier to read, and
to the editor in chief for inviting us to send our work to the Revista Colombiana de
Estadística. This work was supported by a grant from the pharmaceutical MERCK
in Puerto Rico, Comprehensive Cancer Center of the University of Puerto Rico
and by NIH Grant: P20-RR016470. Jairo Fúquene was supported by PII grant -
School of Business Administration, UPR-RRP.
                                                                        
             Recibido: septiembre de 2010 — Aceptado: febrero de 2011
Appendix

A1. Resumen
    Los ensayos clínicos son contenciosos y controversiales. Las compañías farma-
céuticas están ansiosas de probar que el tratamiento nuevo, en el que han invertido
fortunas, es una mejora sustancial sobre el tratamiento actual. Por el contrario,
las agencias reguladoras gubernamentales adoptan la posición contraria y exigen,
por evidencia inequívoca, que el nuevo tratamiento sea sustancialmente mejor que
el actual.
   La estadística bayesiana permite emplear una técnica muy útil para modelar
posiciones encontradas, usando no una sino dos distribuciones a priori sobre los
parámetros. Una es la previa optimista, que corresponde a la expectativa favorable.
La otra, la previa pesimista, que corresponde a una posición escéptica.
   Para ser mas específicos, consideremos el siguiente test unilateral. Suponga-
mos que tenemos dos tratamientos médicos que corresponden a probabilidades de
eventos p1 y p2 . Los eventos pueden ser, por ejemplo, “recurrencia del evento” o
“muerte”. La Tasa de Chances (Odds Ratio) está definida como
                                         p1 /(1 − p1 )
                                  OR =
                                         p2 /(1 − p2 )
y para hacer el supuesto de normalidad más realista consideramos los log odds:
θ = log(OR). Con frecuencia, el test de interés es

                            H0 : θ ≥ θH , vs H1 : θ < θH                             (5)

   Acá, H1 es la región de mejoría sustancial del nuevo tratamiento sobre el stan-
dard. Entonces, θH < 0, corresponde a OR < 1; por ejemplo, OR = 0,5 es el punto
de 50 % de mejoría.
   La primera parte de la propuesta de Spiegelhalter et al. (2004) es suponer
dos densidades a priori, πS and πO (escéptica y optimista respectivamente), que

                                      Revista Colombiana de Estadística 34 (2011) 333–345

344                                            John Cook, Jairo Fúquene   Luis Pericchi

cumplan con las siguientes especificaciones. La escéptica se centra en el punto de
no diferencia, es decir, en θ = 0, y le da una probabilidad pequeña, denotada por
ξ, digamos ξ = 0,05 o ξ = 0,025, a la hipótesis alternativa de mejoría sustancial,
es decir a H1 , esto es:
                                        Z θH
                             PS (H1 ) =      πS (θ)dθ = ξ                      (6)
                                          −∞


   Por otro lado, la previa optimista esta centrada en θH y le da probabilidad ξ,
de que no hay beneficio con el tratamiento nuevo, y entonces
                                          Z ∞
                           PO (θ > 0) =         π0 (θ)dθ = ξ                        (7)
                                           0


    Si bajo la previa escéptica, P (H1 | datos, πS ) > 1 − γ, con 1 − γ grande,
digamos 1 − γ = 0,95, entonces, habiendo convencido a un escéptico es seguro
decidir en favor de H1 . Si por el contrario, con la previa optimista PO (θ > 0 |
datos) > 1 − γ, es seguro concluir que no hay beneficio con el tratamiento nuevo.
Si hay desacuerdo entre los procedimientos, el ensayo no es inconcluyente dada la
información acumulada hasta el momento.
    Este enfoque es intuitivamente muy satisfactorio. Sin embargo, tiene el defecto
potencial de ser demasiado cauteloso y conservador, dilatando innecesariamente
las decisiones. En Spiegelhalter et al. (2004) se proponen previas normales, las
cuales simplifican las cuentas. Sin embargo, en este artículo mostramos que pode-
mos preservar las ventajas del enfoque optimista vs. escéptico, pero eliminando el
dogmatismo inherente en las previas conjugadas (normales en este caso).


Algunos antedecedentes. Pericchi   Smith (1992) estudiaron algunos aspec-
tos de la robustez de la previa Student-t y un parámetro de localización normal,
y proveyeron de aproximaciones los momentos de la densidad posterior bajo el
modelo Student-t/normal. La previa Cauchy, como Student-t con un grado de li-
bertad, puede ser utilizada en este contexto. También para normal “log-odds” (el
parámetro θ definido arriba) existe una previa definida por Berger (1985), que
además de tener colas pesadas, da resultados que pueden ser calculados en forma
cerrada, esto es, con expresiones matemáticas concretas en lugar de resultados
numéricos. Otra previa de colas pesadas ha sido propuesta por Berger   Pericchi
(1996); la llamada previa intrínseca. Todas estas previas de colas pesadas dan re-
sultados prácticamente idénticos, hecho ilustrado por Fúquene et al. (2009). En
este último artículo, se estudian previas robustas, basadas en resultados de ensa-
yos clínicos previos: las así llamadas previas clínicas. Las previas estudiadas en el
presente artículo modelizan no historia previa, sino posiciones adversas frente a un
ensayo clínico nuevo; las previas escépticas vs optimistas. En este trabajo ilustra-
mos que suponiendo estas previas, respetando los requerimientos probabilísticos de
Spiegelhalter et al. (1994), pero cambiando su forma funcional a previas robustas,
obtenemos ensayos clínicos más eficientes en los que se produce la convergencia de
criterios en forma más rápida y eficiente.

                                    Revista Colombiana de Estadística 34 (2011) 333–345

Skeptical and Optimistic Robust Priors for Clinical Trials                           345

A2. Conclusiones
    La idea de una previa escéptica vs. otra previa optimista es muy útil para
incrementar la utilización de la estadística bayesiana en la estadística médica. Esta
idea introducida por Spiegelhalter y colaboradores, tiene dos aspectos: el primero
es que la región donde el tratamiento nuevo es sustancialmente mejor tiene alta
probabilidad bajo la previa optimista y baja probabilidad bajo la previa escéptica.
El segundo aspecto es la forma funcional de las dos previas. Eso fue supuesto por
Spiegelhalter et al. (1994) como previas normales. Se muestra acá, lo inédito, que
el comportamiento del procedimiento depende crucialmente de la forma funcional
de las previas optimistas y escépticas, particularmente del tamaño de las colas. Lo
ilustramos con un ejemplo en la sección 2 y lo demostramos matemáticamente en
la sección 3. Más aún, se sostiene que el comportamiento con colas gruesas mejora
y hace más eficiente el procedimiento, ya que las previas con colas gruesas están
mas dispuestas a cambiar de opinión que las previas de colas finas. Finalmente, el
uso de la previa de Cauchy, de Berger o Intrínseca resultados análogos para efectos
prácticos.


Agradecimientos
    Agradecemos a dos referees anónimos y al editor especial por sugerencias cons-
tructivas que hicieron mucho más claro nuestro artículo, y a la editora jefe por
invitarnos a enviar nuestro trabajo a la Revista Colombiana de Estadística. Este
trabajo ha sido parcialmente financiado por la farmacéutica MERCK, el Centro
Comprehensivo de Cáncer de la Universidad de Puerto Rico y por NIH Grant: P20-
RR016470. Jairo Fúquene fue financiado por PII - Facultad de Administración de
Empresas, UPR-RRP.

References
Berger J O. Statistical Decision Theory and Bayesian Analysis second edn. (1985). Springer-Verlag.
Berger J O, Pericchi L R. The intrinsic Bayes factor for model selection and prediction.  (1996). Journal of the American Statistical Association.
Cook J D. Asymptotic results for normal-cauchy model.(2010). UT MD Anderson Cancer Center Department of Biostatistics.
Fúquene J, Cook J, Pericchi L R. A case for robust Bayesian priors with applications to clinical trials.(2009). Bayesian Analysis.
Pericchi L R, Smith A F M. Exact and approximate posterior moments for a normal location parameter.(1992). Journal of the Royal Statistical Society.
Spiegelhalter D J, Abrams K R, Myles J P. Bayesian Approaches to Clinical Trials and Health-Care Evaluation.(2004). Wiley.
Spiegelhalter D J, Freedman L S, Parmar M K B. Bayesian approaches to randomized trials (with discussion). (1994). Journal of the Royal Statistical Society.